you could imagine our descendants
deciding that they're not going to just
suffer the heat death that they're going
to try and trigger a vacuum Decay event
to another vacuum with a lower cost
martial constant if it is possible for
people just to wipe out their entire
future L cone libertarian fantasies
can't really happen is it possible that
50% of all of the nuclear weapons ever
dropped in combat were in fact dropped
against direct orders take an exam I
gave years ago in my graduate
generativity class at Stanford and give
it to these models 3 years ago zero a
year ago a weak student and now they
essentially Ace the test these are the
two most beautiful theories of 20th
century physics these two theories seem
to be inconsistent with each other there
is however one fact about that merger
that we are most confident about and the
answer to that involves black
holes today I'm chatting with Adam Brown
who is a founder and lead of the blue
ship team which is cracking math and
reasoning at Google deepmind and a
theoretical physicist at Stanford Adam
welcome delighted to be here let's do
this okay we'll talk about AI in a
second but first let's talk about
physics okay um first question what is
going to be the ultimate fate of the
universe and you know how much
confidence should we have the ultimate
fate is a really long time in the future
so you probably shouldn't be that
confident about the answer to that
question in fact our idea of the answer
to what the ultimate fate is has changed
a lot uh in the last 100 years about 100
years ago we thought that the Universe
was just static wasn't n growing or
shrinking was just sitting there
statically and then in the late 20s
Hubble and Friends looked up at massive
telescopes in the sky and noticed that
distant galaxies were moving away from
us and the universe is expanding so
that's like big Discovery number one
there was then you know a learned debate
for many years about you know the
universe is expanding but is it
expanding sufficiently slowly that it'll
then recollapse in a big crunch like a
Time reverse of the big bang and that'll
that'll be super bad for us or is it
going to keep expanding forever but just
sort of ever more slowly uh as as you
know gravity pulls it back but it it
keeps it's fast enough that it keeps
expanding and there was a big debate
around this question and it turns out
the answer to that question is is
neither neither of them is correct in
possibly the worst day in human history
sometime in the 1990s we discovered that
in fact not only is the universe
expanding it's expanding faster and
faster and faster it's what we call dark
energy or the cosmal constant is this
you just a word for uncertainty is
making the universe expand at an Ever
faster rate accelerated expansion uh as
Universe grows so that's that's a
radical change in
our understanding of the the fate of the
universe and if true is super duper bad
news it's really bad news uh because the
accelerated expansion of the universe is
dragging away from us lots of distant
galaxies and we really want to use those
galaxies we have we have big plans to go
and grab them and turn them into
vacation destinations or computronium or
in any other ways extract utility from
them and we can't if if the cosmal
content is really constant uh if you
know this picture is correct because uh
anything close enough we can go out and
grab it obviously but if it's further
away than about a dozen billion light
years the expansion of the universe is
dragging it away sufficiently rapidly
that even if we send probes out at
almost the speed of light they they will
never make it they will never make it
there and make it back uh they'll never
even make it there if it's sufficiently
far away and that means that there's a
finite amount of free energy in our
future and that's bad I mean that means
we we're doomed to a heat death if
that's true um but is it true is it I
mean that was the second ask your
question and you know first of all we
keep changing our minds about these
things over the last century or so so on
first principled grounds you may be
somewhat suspicious that we'll change
our minds again and and none of this has
settled physics and indeed it may be
that the cosmal constant is not constant
and you should you should hope with all
your heart that it's not um it may be
that it naturally bleeds away it may be
in fact that Our Fate is in our hands
and that our distant descendants will go
and bleed the cosmal conent away we
force it to go to zero they will be
strongly incentivized to do it if if
they can because otherwise we're doomed
to a heat death how would they bleed
this away oh um okay this this obviously
depends on physics that we're not
totally sure about yet um but it seems
pretty consistent with the known laws of
physics that the cosmal constant what we
perceive it as being a constant this
this this dark energy quantity that's
that's pushing the universe apart from
each other uh in many very natural
extensions of the known laws of physics
uh that is something that we have the
ability to change in fact it can change
can take different values uh it is not
just totally fixed once and for all that
in fact uh you have what's called
different vacuum different uh regions of
parameter space that you can transition
between in which the cosmal constant can
take different
values and if that's true then well you
could either sort of wait around and
hope to get lucky hope that the Universe
just of spontaneously moves from one of
these vacuums to another one with a
lower cosmal constant uh tending towards
zero ASM totically or uh you could take
matters into your own hand or you could
imagine our descendants deciding
that they're not going to just suffer
the heat death that they're going to try
and trigger a a vacuum Decay event to
get us from one the vacuum we're in to
another vacuum with a lower cosm
constant uh and our distant descendants
will be forced basically to do that if
they don't want to suffer a heat death
yeah proceed with caution but definitely
definitely proceed with caution you know
in these theories where there's lots and
lots of vacuums out there uh and uh most
of those vacuums are incredibly
inhospitable to Life as we know it in
fact seemingly they're just completely
inhospitable to all forms of
intelligence uh so you really really
don't want to end up in them however
again again if our best theories are
correct it it seems as though there
should be some of them that are much
like our own in many ways but have a uh
lower value of the cosmal constant and
so what we'd want to do is is engineer
uh that we end up in one of those
vacuums sorry what what is a vacuum ah
uh great question uh a vacuum is like a
uh possible well what we would perceive
as a possible set of laws of physics of
uh as we see them um so what it really
is is a a Minima in some higher
dimensional uh abstract laws of physics
space uh in which you can find yourself
in a Minima but these Minima may just be
local Minima in fact according to our
understanding the Minima which we live
today is that gives us all of the laws
of physics that we see around us is in
fact just a local minimum and there's a
lower Minima in fact there's many lower
Minima out there to which we can
transition spontaneously or because of
our own deliberate action okay I'm just
going to throw all my confusion at you
and you you figure out which one is like
worth dealing with first um what is the
nature of um the loss function that
makes one value of minimum and one
higher up you know what is exactly the
ball rolling up on when it gets out or
into uh a valley here um and then you're
hinting at the possibility that there
are other other places in I'm not sure
if you're suggesting in the physical
universe or in some hypothetical
universe IE where the vacuum could be
different as in in reality there are
other Pockets with different vacuums or
that um hypothetically they could exist
or that no our universe counterfactually
could be have been one of these um I
don't
know this is the kind of thing I'd like
throw into like uh you know like put
everything I can into like a claw prompt
and see what comes out the other end
good well I'm um happy to be your your
your clawed um the loss function is the
energy density
um and so maybe a good analogy would be
water um water can exist in many phases
it can be steam it can be water it can
be ice and uh even if it's in a cloud
let's say it would rather rather be
water than be water vapor but it's
having a tough time getting there
because in in the middle there's a
there's a barrier and so you know that's
just spontaneously it can eventually due
to a sort of thermal process turn from
Steam into to water those will be like
the two Minima in this in this lost
landscape and or you can go and do cloud
seeding to turn it from water uh from
water vapor into water and so those
would be the equivalent of the the
Minima here the existence of different
Minima in general is a very well
established part of physics the
possibility that we could engineer going
from one Minima to another in a
controlled way is a more speculative
branch of uh physics speculation uh but
it seems totally consistent with
everything we know that our distance
attendants would try to attempt it what
would it take to do this probably you'd
want a something would look a bit like a
particle accelerator but it would be uh
considerably more controlled you need
aort very controlled way to sort of
collapse a field and and and make a
bubble of this new vacuum that was big
enough that it would continue to expand
uh rather than just recollapse under its
own surface tension you would have to do
that in a very careful way uh both to
make sure that you didn't you know
accidentally make a black hole instead
by the time you concentrated all those
energies and also worse than making a
black hole would be ending up in a
vacuum that you didn't want to end up in
would be ending up in a vacuum in which
you would not only bled off the
cosmological constant in some way but
that you had uh changed let's say the
electromagnetic constant or the strong
nuclear force or the any of these other
forces which would be seriously bad news
because if you did that you know your
your life uh as you know it uh is
extremely well attuned to the value of
the electromagnetic constant in your
evolutionary environment it would be
very very bad indeed if we changed those
constant as well we'd really just try
and Target the cosmal constant and
nothing else and that would require a
lot of engineering prowess so sorry it
sounds like you're saying that um
changing the laws of physics is like
it's not like some CRA it's not even
like Dyson spear level crazy it's like
you somebody could do it like some
planet in the middle of uh I is
definitely substantially harder than uh
Dyson spars uh as far as the tech tree
goes but it's not uh yeah what do we
mean by changing the laws of physics
like that just sounds like magic we're
not actually changing the laws of
physics we're just changing the laws of
physics uh the sort of low energy laws
of physics as they present to us in this
scenario again this is speculative but
it's not like super duper crazy it's
it's a natural consequence of our best
theories of or at least some of our best
theories of quantum gravity that that
they allow for this possibility and
there is a metal law of physics the true
laws of physics be it's String Theory or
or whatever else that you're not
changing that's just the rules of the
game what I'm describing is uh changing
the uh the way that the Universe looks
around you changing the cosmological
constant so I think again changing water
into water vapor into water is a is a
great analogy here it's there's nothing
actually the laws of physics are still
the laws of physics but the law the way
it feels to live in that Universe you
know the value of the electromagnetic
constant is perhaps not an absolute
fixed value it can it can vary in
different places and one similarly the
density of water around you the
viscosity would would change it'll be
it'll be environmental variable like
that yeah so um one question you might
have
is if this is the thing that could sort
of uh I don't know if organic is the
right way to describe it but um maybe
spontaneous if this is the thing that
can just like kind of happen um there's
there's something really interesting
where like if a thing can happen you
kind of see examples of it happening
before so even with nuclear weapons I'm
I don't remember the exact phrase I'm
sure you actually probably know what it
is um but wasn't it the case that early
in Earth's history when there was a
higher fract
of 238 isotopes that there were
spontaneous uh nuclear explosions uh
there probably was spontaneous nuclear
reactors not not nuclear there's they've
discovered a seam in Africa where it
looks like there was a fion reaction
that naturally happened it didn't uh
explode but it did do the same thing
that happens in our nuclear power plants
yeah you know one way you can look at
like nukes is like oh my gosh this is
like this thing just would not have been
possible if like some intelligent being
is had and try to make it happen but you
know like something like this happened
before um because the laws of physics
allow it uh is there any story you can
tell here where uh this vacuum Decay is
like in one sense maybe it takes like a
super intelligent species to coordinate
to make it happen but also because it is
a thing that the laws of physics can
manufacture or can allow for it has Al
it has happened before or is happening
or something yeah I mean absolutely um
almost certainly anything that that
humans can do can happen without humans
it's interesting to reflect on what
aspects of human behavior Nature has a
tough time doing without us and what it
just does on its own um you for example
we we make colder things in our
Laboratories than really exist naturally
in the universe but the universe
certainly could make anything colder
just by chance um
but yeah vacuum Decay is something that
if it is possible will in our future
definitely happen that's just like a a
feature of the world that eventually due
in in our distant future if it's
possible at all it will happen due to a
Quantum
fluctuation our descendants may not wish
to wait around for a Quantum fluctuation
to happen they may wish to take the fate
into their own hands since a Quantum
fluctuations can take exponentially long
times to happen and if they even
happened you'd end up in a unfavorable
vacuum not hospitable for life rather
than trying to steer the cosmal cons in
a happy
Direction but uh they certainly can
happen and in our future and indeed
definitely will happen if if they're
permitted you know according to our
understanding of quantum mechanics uh if
they're permitted they must eventually
happen um furthermore there are again
speculative but not wild theories of the
early Universe in which this happened in
our past in which we transitioned far
far in the past maybe into what's called
a bubbled universe so we started off in
some other much higher vacuum long in
the past and then what we see as the Big
Bang was in fact just a sort of
local vacuum Decay that then gave rise
to our the bubble in which we we live
everything we see around us uh how how
who who who would be in a position to
see these bubbles usually people are
thinking that something just
spontaneously happens you know like in
the same way that rain spontaneously
happens in a cloud that somebody didn't
go and Seed it deliberately to make it
happen but you could uh more than uh
free to speculate that somebody seated
it to make it happen as well how does
this respect the conservation of energy
or the conservation energy is not
conserved in general relativity huh uh
energy is not conserved it's conserved
at locally at things you can do at a
local level but in an expanding Universe
energy is not conserved globally this is
one of the big surprises this is not
some that is not a speculative statement
that is a statement that goes all the
way back to Einstein and general
relativity is energy is simply not
conserved at the global level it's
conserved at the local level you can't
do something in your lab uh that will
will uh generate free energy but if you
can participate in the expansion of the
entire universe then energy is not
conserved so if you were to spawn a
bubble Universe in your lab you've
theoretically created a lot more matter
and energy um and what would be the
thing that offsets this or that makes
this viable energy is conserved in a
universe that's not expanding okay a
static Universe yeah a universe that is
expanding uh energy is not conserved it
can just it can just sort of appear and
generality is quite clear on that you
know generality Einstein's theory of
space and time uh one of our most
beautiful and best tested theories is
quite clear on that that point energy is
not conserved to ask what happened to
the energy you can ask at a local level
what happened to the energy density but
at at a global level energy is simply
not conserved then do our future
descendants have any constraints in
terms of because earlier we were
mentioning was a catastrophe we found
out about the cosmological constant
because it limits our uh our um Cosmic
Horizon and it th thus limits the free
energy that our descendants would have
access to but if you can just make
entire universes yeah this is this is a
matter of extremely extreme interest I
would say to us uh it won't be relevant
for tens of billions of years probably
uh because that's the time scale on
which the cosmological constant operates
but if the cosmological constant is
truly
constant um and we've only known about
it for 25 years and there are you know
astronomical observations that seem to
be intention with that but like if it is
truly constant uh then there is a finite
amount of free energy in our universe if
it's not constant if we can manipulate
it or even if it naturally decays on its
own then there is the possibility of an
unbounded amount of free energy in our
future and we would avoid a heat death
scenario um the the situation you
mentioned earlier where somebody seated
our universe they've created a bunch of
energy um correct it would be ex that's
related to them having something
equivalent to a a positive cosmological
constant in there yes in any of these
scenarios in which our universe is a
bubble uh that formed in a sort of
bigger what's called a you know a
Multiverse
or that's a loaded term but a a sort of
larger universe in which our universe is
just one bubble yeah the
higher the meta Universe also has a
cosmal constant and it is higher than
the value in our universe that is the
one sense in which there some version of
energy conservation is that you can go
down from high from high to low it is
considerably harder to go from low to I
so the idea is that you recursively have
universes in which the bottom most one
would immediately implode because of a
negative cosmological constant and the
biggest one is like exponentially
increasing correct the rate at which the
universe is exponentially increasing is
set by the cosmal Conant which the
volume of the universe is exponentially
increasing so you can imagine a scenario
in which in which there was a high cosm
maral constant you have a bubble
universe that has a lower value of the
COS maral constant it continues to
expand you could make new bubble
universes or uh you know new regions uh
in that universe that have a lower
cosmal constant either naturally and
spontaneously or or due to act action
that we might take and as long as that
cosm martial con con is uh non- negative
zero or positive that universe will not
implode if it goes negative that
universe will eventually implode uh so
you could imagine a Cascade in which you
go to lower and lower values of the
cosmological constant there are a lot of
engineering details to be worked out but
what I'm describing is is a scenario
that is not inconsistent with the known
laws of physics how How likely do you
think this is if the laws of physics are
as we believe them to be and if we do
not blow ourselves up
uh in some other way this is a issue
that our distant descendants will
eventually have to confront no no no as
in like the the whole like the there's
like other bubbles not about something
our descendants might do yeah but the
fact that the Big Bang was the result of
a bubble within some other uh meta
stable State that's a tricky question um
but since you asked it I'd say probably
50% there's a lot we don't understand
about any of these questions they're all
like super speculative it's an active
area of research how to combine quantum
mechanics and expanding universes um on
the other hand it seems pretty natural
uh when you do combine uh quantum
mechanics and gravity and try and fit
them all together in a consistent
picture if universes can expand a lot
then
the at all according to the
gravitational Theory then quantum
mechanics will you know naturally
populate those those bits that can
expand a lot and so you'll naturally end
up with an expanding universe so I would
say probably in my heart slightly higher
than 50% but I'm going to round it down
to 50 out of epistemic humility yeah
it's funny because there's often the way
people talk about their AI timelines of
like you know if I like my really I
think it's like 2027 but if I'm like
taking the outside you I'm going to say
2030 um okay and is there any way uh
given our current understanding of using
bubble universes to do useful work for
the people outside of it so to have do
some computation within it or to get
some sort of actual energy out of it for
the people outside of the bubble so the
thing about these bubbles is that they
tend to expand at the speed of light so
even if you start off outside you're
probably going to end up inside them in
short order unless you run away very
quickly yeah so this isn't something
that we make in the lab and then just
remains in a box in the lab and then we
use used to do things this would be
something that we would do or maybe
would just happen to us because of
spontaneous vacuum Decay and uh it would
engulf all of our future L cone and so
we wouldn't it's not a it's not a box
that you're using to do things it's a
new place that you live you better hope
that you've engineered stuff so that
that new place is still hospitable for
life so look if if it's the case that
you can set up some apparatus uh not now
but in not in this room but eventually
that uh if some individual wants to
change the constant of nature they can
not only do this but then the
repercussions will extend literally as
far as light can expand
um uh you might have some hope that you
know future civilizations individuals or
AIS have tons of freedoms they can do
all kinds of uh cool things you can have
your own Galactic cluster over there and
if you want to you
know go do whatever you want right go
live your life and it's going to be some
libertarian Utopia um but if you can
literally destroy the universe yeah
maybe it's a different story that is a
big negative externality destroying your
future L cone and in a world with big
negative externalities libertarian
fantasies can't really happen yeah it
has pretty good big government
governance implications is that if it is
possible for people just to wipe out
their entire future Lake cone not only
themselves but everybody else who wishes
to participate in that future Lake cone
then we're going to need a government
structure that uh prevents them from
doing so I mean the worst case scenario
is even worse than that not just that
you know they could do it but that they
in some sense be incentivized to do it
you could imagine really adverse laws of
physics in which maybe you could
speculatively build some power plant
that just is like really uh you know
makes use of just sort of sitting on
that edge of instability and and then
you know each person individually might
say say oh I'm quite happy to Bear one
in a trillion chance that I wipe out the
future L cone because I get so much
benefit from this power plant but that
uh
but that obviously the you know negative
externality means means that people
really shouldn't do that so I hope the
laws of physics don't turn out that way
otherwise uh otherwise we're going to
have to have some super AR in control
I've done a couple of these interviews
actually and these end up being my
favorite interviews where a normal
person who's just had great school
education can think like of course I
understand this right or if you just
like seen enough like YouTube videos
about like uh popside um give you a
concrete example uh when I interview
David Reich the genetic of of ancient DN
I feel like we have a sense that we
understand the basics of how humans came
to be what is the story of human
evolution and just like the the episode
revealed to me that b the main questions
we might have about like how humans came
to be where did it happen when did it
happen who did it happen with in fact
it's like totally the last few Decades
of insights have totally revolutionized
our understanding we have the sense that
we understand um what is like what what
basically cosmology implies but this
idea that in fact um there's this
underlying uh uh field which not only
implies very interesting things about
the distant past about the Big Bang but
also what our future descendants uh you
know what kinds of civilizations they'll
be able to set up both from a governance
and uh a practical like energy
perspective it's like totally changes
your understanding yeah it just keeps
changing I mean not not just your idea
our idea everybody's idea has changed a
lot in my lifetime and and may continue
to change and in some sense it's because
you have the lever arm the long lever
arm of asking about the very very
distant future that makes even small
uncertainties today pan out to
absolutely ginormous distances in the
distant future I think you earlier you
said I wouldn't be that crazy but also
it's not as easy as a Dyson spear um
like what are we talking about here how
how much um energy would it take to the
energy requirements are probably pretty
small much more than we can currently
make in our particle colliders but much
smaller just in terms of MC s than the
you know the energy in your body for
example um the energy is not going to be
the heartbit the harbit is going to be
concentrating it together in a really
small little bubble that's shaped
exactly right in order that it doesn't
form a black hole
uh expands in just the way that you want
it to expand and lands in the vacuum
that you're aiming for so it's more
going to be a control issue than just a
pure energy but but you think this is
just table Stakes for like you know
distant descendants who are like
colonizing the Stars it's not
inconsistent with the known laws of
physics which
means that it's just engineering I feel
like that the most sort of Atty phrase
pH going to how is your proposition is
not inconsistent with the lot know lots
of physics a lot yeah not not this um if
we lived in a world with intelligent
design and these were the laws we found
ourselves with at a high level what is
the creator trying to maximize like what
is the I mean other than maybe us
existing um uh does there seem like
something that is being uh optimized for
what is what's going on here um if you
just throw a dot in laws of physics
space in some sense uh you would not
there are some properties of our
universe that would be somewhat
surprising um in including the fact that
our life seems to be incredibly
hospitable for complexity and
interesting uh interestingness and uh
the possibility of intelligent life
um which is an interesting fact you know
everything is just tuned just so that
chemistry is possible um and perhaps in
most places you would throw the dot in
possibility space chemistry would be
impossible the universes we look around
us is incredibly Rich this the structure
at the scale of virus all the way to
structure at the scale of galaxies
there's interesting structure at all
levels this is this is a very
interesting fact now some people think
that actually interesting structure is a
very generic property and if we threw a
DOT uh somewhere in possibility space
there would be interesting structure no
matter where it hit maybe it wouldn't
look like ours but there'd be some
different structure but really if you
look at the laws of physics it does seem
like they're very well attuned for life
so in your scenario where there's an
intelligent Creator uh then they would
probably be uh you'd have to say they'd
optimized for that it's also the case
that you can imagine
explanations for why it's so well tuned
for life that don't involve a
intelligence is there any explanation
other than the anthropic principle for
why uh we find ourselves in Cal Universe
well you suggested one with an
intelligent Creator but yeah the usual
one that people like to talk about is
the anthropic so is it like 99% that
basically the reason we find ourselves
in a universe like this is the anthropic
principle like
probility well what probility you put on
like anthropic principle is key to
explaining why we find ourselves in the
kind of universe we find ourselves in I
think it's going to depend on what
quantity you're asking me about yeah so
if you ask me you
know 99% of the matter in the solar
system lives in the Sun or on Jupiter
and yet weie seem to live in this like
really weird corner of the solar system
why is that I'm pretty confident that
the answer to that is anthropic that if
we lived in the center of the Sun we' be
dead
and so one should expect intelligent
life to like live in this weird place in
parameter space so that's perhaps you
know my most confident answer to that
question why do we live where we live
then if we start talking about different
concepts of nature we start getting
different answers to that question why
is the universe tuned such that the
proton is just a tiny bit more stable
than the neutron you know just uh that
seems like that's begging for a atropic
answer of course if that's true that
demands that there be different places
somewhere in the Multiverse where in
fact the neutron is slightly heavier
than the uh the protons Decay to
neutrons rather than vice versa and
people just don't live there um so that
if you want to go down that road you end
up being naturally drawn to the
existence of a of these variables
scanning over space is is there some way
for the anthropic principle to exist
that doesn't involve these bubble
universes yes all you need is that there
different places in some larger
possibility space where these where
these quantities scan where they take
different values bubble universe is just
one way to do that we could just be
different experiments simulations in
some meta Universe somewhere um what
part of this is the least sort of
logically inevitable right like some
some theories seem to have this
uh feeling of like it had to be this way
and then some are just like why are
there these like 16 fields and hundreds
of particles and so for what part of the
the our understanding physics I would
say that there's three categories
there's things like quantum mechanics
and general relativity that are not
logically inevitable but do seem to be
attractors in in in some sense um then
there are things like the standard model
has 20 fields and it has a mass of the
neutrino why do those masses of the
neutrino have the values that they have
that seems the standard model was just
fine before we discovered that the
neutros have mass in the 1990s and those
those just seem to be just totally kind
of out of nowhere who who ordered that
was a famous Nobel prize winning
physicist said about the muan in fact uh
uh long longer ago than that they just
seem to be uh there but without any
particular reason um H and then there
are these quantities that are somewhere
in the middle that are not logically
necessary but do seem to be necessary
for Life as we know it to exist how
confident are we that these different uh
properties of different universes would
actually inconsistent with intelligent
life yeah I think that's a great
question and and this this um you know
line of thought starts to is a is a
skeptical response to the anthropic
principle yeah uh an example that
sometimes people use is you know a
puzzle that sitting in some depression
in the ground reflects on how wonderful
the universe is that that this puddle
seemed this depression in the ground
seem to have me be made the perfect
shape for the puddle to exist and arv VI
would and said no the reason the puddle
has that shape is because it it isn't
self- adapted to the hole in the ground
so maybe no matter what the laws of
physics there would be something that
emerged there and suddenly if you go to
you know there's all these weird
bacteria at the bottom of the sea or in
nuclear reactors or in various other
places this kind of life will find a way
uh philosophy seems to be adapted at
least there where it's very different
from the surface of the Earth where we
find ourselves and yet there are able to
be certain
uh life is able to live in undersee
Vents and is able to adapt itself to
those environments I think I basically
by that life is quite adaptable but
whether life is adaptable enough that a
universe with a cosmal constant that
ripped it apart every microsc I that
seems implausible to me or even closer
to home the center of the sun it's not
clear exactly what whether we could get
intelligent life living at the center of
the sun even though that has the same
laws of physics as us it just has a
different environmental variables um
what is the most underappreciated uh
Discovery in cosmology In Our Lifetime
we have uh so in the 2000s and and
before very carefully studied the cosmic
microwave background this what's
sometimes called the echo of the big
bang and the inhomogeneities in it the
fact that it's not quite the same in
every direction and and doing that
discovered like a super interesting fact
that was definitely not known uh in my
lifetime anyway which is the Quantum
origin of all of the structure we see in
the universe so if you look out in the
universe uh the density is not the same
everywhere you know the density on Earth
is much more than an interplanetary
space which is itself much more than an
Intergalactic space and the sun you
center of the sun is all all the more
denser it is in homogeneous it is not
the same um and if you look back to the
early Universe it was considerably more
homogeneous it was it was homogeneous to
one part in uh 10 to the five or 10 to
the six Su super almost everywhere every
Point had almost exactly the same
density
and so then there's kind of an easy part
and a hard part the easy part is
understanding how if you if you
have very small inhomogenities how they
grow into large inhomogeneties that's
that's already quite well understood by
classical physics basically the idea is
this if you have a place that's denser
and a place that's less dense then the
gravitational force pulls stuff towards
the high density stuff so if you've a
small in homogeneity they naturally grow
under that effect where they where they
just gravitationally fall towards the
denser thing that that'll if you start
seeded with small inhomogenities that
will grow large in homogeneities um and
that's that's well understood the thing
that we Now understand much better than
we did uh is where those small
inhomogeneities come from like why just
after the big bang was the universe not
perfectly in homogeneous because if it
was perfectly homogeneous there's no
opportunity for it to for anything to
grow and we We Now understand with a
high degree of confidence something that
we didn't understand which is that those
in homogeneities was seeded by Quantum
fluctuations that when the universe just
after the big bang was considerably
smaller than it is today uh the effects
of quantum mechanics were
correspondingly more important and those
Quantum fluctuations produced tiny
little
fluctuations uh in in the density of
matter in the universe and all of those
tiny little you know one part in a
million fluctuations grew into all of
the structure you see in the Universe
all the galaxies Yi everything else is
there is it a meaningful question to ask
what level of structure the each
individual uh discrepancy corresponds to
each individual one and 10 to the five
part is it is it a galactic supercluster
is it a Galaxy is it uh it depends so
there were um we believe that these were
generated during the dur a period we
call inflation very poorly underst
served very early in the universe and
there were fluctuations made not just at
one scale in those days but at all
scales or many many scales so there were
there were fluctuations made at a scale
that nowadays corresponds to you know
10% of the distance across the visible
Universe uh all the way down to uh
structures that were you know in
homogeneities that were were much much
smaller scale that correspond to a
Galaxy today all the way down to now
this is speculation but but in some
models of inflation there were tiny in
homogeneities very small scale
inhomogeneties that would give rise to
primordial black holes like tiny little
black holes left over from The Big Bang
there's no actual evidence uh in terms
of observational evidence no strong
observational evidence for those but
those are a possibility that's allowed
by auther and people think about them
and look for them super excited to
announce our new partner scale AI Adam
is of course a lead of blue shift which
is cracking matths and reasoning at
Google Deep Mind Deep Mind along with
all the other major AI Labs like meta
anthropic and open AI partner with scale
for many of them scale supplies high
quality data to fuel post trainining
including Advanced reasoning
capabilities publicly available data is
running out to keep developing smarter
and smarter models Labs will need to
rely on scales data Foundry which
combines subject matter experts with AI
models to generate fresh data and break
through the data wall scales research
lab seal is focused on human Centric AI
alignment Seal's mission is to develop
practical AI safety Frameworks evaluate
Frontier AI system safety via public
leader boards and create foundations for
integrating Advanced AI into society
while ensuring alignment and human
control so if you're an AI researcher or
engineer and you want to learn more
about how skills data Foundry can help
you go beyond the current Frontier of
capabilities go to scale.com
dwares all right back to Adam what makes
general relativity so
beautiful I think general relativity is
really an
extraordinary story um it's PR unusual
in the history of physics that you to
First approximation just have one guy
who sits down and thinks really really
hard with lots of thought experiments
about jumping up and down in elevators
and Beatles moving on the surface of
planets and all the rest of it and at
the end of that time writes down a
theory that completely
reconceptualizes Nature's most familiar
force and also speaks not just to that
but
is speaks to the origin and fate of the
universe and almost immediately achieves
decisive experimental confirmation in
the orbits of astronomical observations
of the orbits of planets and the
deflections of of Lights during eclipses
and stuff like that it's a pretty
beautiful Theory um and it completely
changed our idea of gravity from being a
force to just being a artifact of the
curvature of SpaceTime actually so this
is actually a good point to uh chat
about your actual day job so so there's
these open debates about the kind of
reasoning that these llms do does it
correspond to quote unquote true
reasoning or is it something more
procedural and it sometimes get into a
definition game but this is maybe a good
way to test our intuitions here um the
kind of thing that Einstein was doing uh
where you start off with
um thought experiments you start off
with some seeming conceptual
inconsistencies and existing models and
you trace them through to some beautiful
unified theory at the end and you make
incredibly productive use of these
intuition pumps um that kind of
reasoning how far are are AIS from that
I have heard it said and I kind of agree
with this that maybe the very last thing
that these systems will be able to do
these llms will be able to do is given
the laws of physics as we understood
them at the turn of the last century
invent gen relativity from that uh so I
think that's probably the terminal step
and then once once it can do that if it
can do that then there won't be much
else to do as far as uh humans are
concerned it's pretty extraordinary I
mean particularly coming from a physics
background in which progress is pretty
slow uh to come to the AI field and see
progress being so
extraordinarily rapid day by day week by
week year by year
um looking at it it certainly looks like
these
llms uh and these AI
systems in some sense are just
interpolators but the level of
abstraction at which they're
interpolating keeps going up and up and
up uh and we keep sort of writing up
that chain of abstractions and then
presumably from a sufficiently at point
of view the invention of
generativity uh from Newtonian physics
is just interpolation at some
sufficiently grandio level of
abstraction that perhaps tells us
something about the nature of
intelligence human intelligence as well
as uh as well as about these large
language
models if you ask me how many years
until we can do that uh that is not
totally clear but
um in some sense General general
relativity was the greatest leap that
Humanity ever made and uh once we can do
that perhaps in 10 years uh then then we
will have fully encompassed human
intelligence will it have the same will
it be of the same character as what
Einstein did clearly there's some there
are many disanalogies between human
intelligence and these large language
models but I think at the right level of
distraction it may be the same do you
see early examples of the kind of thing
it was obviously not that the Lev of
difficulty but you just start off with
like hey here's here's something funny
uh go think about it for a while um like
what's is there is there something
especially impressive you see when you
kind of run that kind of experiment at
the moment these tend to be you know the
systems tend to be doing uh more
Elementary material than that they tend
to be doing undergraduate level material
um yes I haven't seen anything that
jumps out to me like inventing General
TV or even a toy version of that but
there is in some sense creativity or
interpolation required to answer any of
these problems where you you start with
some science problem you need to
recognize that it's analogous to some
other thing that you know uh and then
sort of combine them uh and then make a
mathematical uh problem out of it and
and solve that problem do you think AI
mathematicians AI physicist will have
advantages over humans just because they
can can by default think in terms of
weird dimensions and manifolds in a way
that doesn't natively come to humans ah
um you know I think maybe we need to
back up to in what sense the humans do
or don't think natively in high
Dimensions obviously it's not our
natural space there was a technology
that was invented to think about these
things which was you know notation
tensor notation various other things
that allows you to much using just even
writing as as Einstein did 100 years ago
allows you to of naturally move between
dimensions and then you're thinking more
about manipulating these mathematical
objects than you are about thinking in
higher Dimensions I don't think there's
any sense I mean in which large language
models naturally think in higher
Dimensions more than humans do you could
say well this large language models have
billions of parameters that's like a
billion dimensional space but you could
say the same about the human brain that
it has all of these billions of
parameters and is therefore billion
dimensional whether that that fact
translates into thinking in uh billions
of spatial Dimensions I don't really I
don't really see that in the human and I
don't think that applies to Anem either
yeah I guess you could imagine that um
you know if You' just seen like a
million different problems that rely on
uh doing this uh weird tensor math then
in the same way that maybe even a human
gets trained up through that to build
better intuitions the same thing would
happen to AI just sees more problems
develop better representations of these
kinds of weird geometries or something I
think that's certainly true that you
know it is definitely seeing more
examples than any of us will ever see in
our life and it is perhaps going to
build more sophisticated representations
than we have yeah often in the history
of physics
a breakthrough is just you know how you
think about it what representation you
do it is sometimes jokingly said that
Einstein's greatest contribution to
physics was his uh certain notation he
invented called the Einstein summation
convention which allowed you to more
easily express and think about these
things in a more compact way that strips
strips away some of the other things you
Penrose one of his great contributions
was just inventing a new notation for
thinking about uh some of these space
times and how they work that made
certain other things clear so clearly
coming up with the right representation
has been an incredibly powerful tool in
the history of physics and and many
incredibly large developments somewhat
analogous to coming up with a new
experimental technique in some of the
more applied physic uh applied
scientific domains and yeah one would
hope that uh as these large language
models get better they come up with
better representations at least better
representations for them that may not be
the same as a good representation for us
we'll be getting somewhere when uh you
asked uh you asked Gemini a question and
it says Ah good question you know in
order to better think about this let me
let let me come up with this new
notation and then
so we've been talking about what AI
physicist could do what could physicist
with AI do that is to say are your uh
physicist colleagues now starting to use
llms are you yourself using llms to help
you with your physics research what are
they especially good at what are they
especially bad at yeah so
what physicists don't do is or don't
productively do is just say llm please
quantize gravity for me go that that
doesn't get you anywhere um but
physicists are starting to use them in a
big way but just not for that you more
of an assistant rather than a
agent three years ago there was totally
us like no no value whatsoever in them
um like lwh hanging fruit fruit uses
include doing literature search so if
you just say you know I have this idea
what are some relevant papers they're
great at that and semantically greater
than any other kind of search the other
thing that they're extremely useful for
now that they were useful for before is
just as a
tutor um if there is a huge amount of
physics that a physicist would be
expected to that has already been done
and no human has ever read the whole
literature or understands everything or
maybe there is even something that you
feel you should understand or you once
understood uh that you don't understand
and I think the very best thing in the
world for that would be to phone up a a
colleague and say uh you know if you
know exactly who to phone they'd
probably be able to answer your question
the best but it's certainly if you just
ask a large language model you get great
answers probably better than all but the
very best person you could phone and
they know about a huge amount they're
non-judgmental uh they will not only
tell you what the right answer is but
debug your understanding on the wrong
answer so I think a lot of physics
professors are using them just as
personal tutors and it fills a whole
because there are personal if you want
to know how to do something basic there
is typically very well documented if you
want to know quite Advanced topics there
are not often good resources for them
and talking to these language models
will often help you debug and understand
your understanding and it'll it'll
explain to you not only why what the
right answer is but why what you thought
was wrong and I think it'll be pretty a
pretty big deal sort of analogous to the
way that um chess players today are much
better even when they're playing across
the board without the benefit of a
computer just having be able to be
tutored by chess machines off the board
and this is the same you want to
understand this thing about group Theory
go and ask the machine and it'll explain
it to you and it won't it won't judge
you while it's doing it so there's a
there's an interesting question here
clearly these models know a lot and
that's evidenced by the fact that even
professional physicists can ask and
learn about FS that they're l m with but
this um doesn't this raise the question
of we think these things are smart and
getting smarter if a human that is
reasonably smart had
memorized uh basically every single
field and knew about the open problems
knew about the open problems in other
fields and how they might connect to
this field knew about um potential
discrepancies and uh connections where
you might expect them to be able to do
is um not like Einstein level conceptual
leaps but there are a lot of things
where just like hey mag uh magnesium
correlates with this kind of phenomenon
in the brain this kind of Phenomenon
correlates with headaches therefore
maybe magnesium supplements cure
headaches um these kinds of like basic
connections you would anyways does this
suggest that llms are as far as
intelligence goes even weaker than we
might expect given the fact that given
their overwhelming advantages in terms
of knowledge they're not able to uh
already translate that into new
discoveries yes they definitely have
different strengths and weaknesses than
humans and obviously one of their
strengths is that they have read way
more than any human will ever read in
their entire life um I think maybe again
the analogy with chess programs is is a
good one here they will often consider
way more possible positions monteal
research than any human chess player
ever would and yet they're even at human
level strength
they're if you fix human level strength
they're still doing way more search so
that their ability to evaluate is maybe
not quite as natural as a human so the
same I think would be true of physics uh
if you had a human who had had read as
much and retained as much as as they had
you might expect them to be even
stronger um do you remember what the
last like uh physics query that you
asked in them was the last physics query
well a recent one was I I asked it to
explain to me the use of squeezed light
at ligo which is a topic that I always
felt like I should understand um and
then try to explain it to somebody else
and realize that I didn't uh understand
it and went and ask the llm that blew me
away that it was able to like exactly
explain to me why what I was thinking
was incorrect um so why do we use this
particular form of Quantum Light in U
ineter used to discover gravitational
waves um that the reason that's a good
topic is perhaps because it's it's an
advanced topic not many people know that
but it's not a super Advanced topic
there are out of a physics literature of
millions of papers there have got to be
at least a thousand on that topic if
there was just a handful of papers on a
topic it's typically not that strong at
it do you reckon that there's a um among
those thousand papers is one that
explains why the um initial
understanding or thought you had about
it was wrong because if it just intuited
that that is actually quite like that's
that's pretty [__] cool I yeah I
don't know uh the answer that is an
interesting question I think it might be
able to debug even without that if you
do much simpler things like give these
language models code yeah it will
successfully debug your code even though
presumably no one has made that exact
bug in your code before this is at a
higher level of abstraction than that
but it wouldn't surprise me if it's able
to debug yeah what you say on that way
it does falsify a lot of stories about
uh they just fuzzy search or whatever
Scott arenson recently or it was a year
or so ago he posted about the fact that
the uh gbd4 got like a b or an A minus
or something on his insured Quantum
Computing class which is definitely a
higher grade than I got and so I'm
already below the
waterline um but uh yeah you know you
teach a bunch of subjects including gr
at Stanford um I assume you've been
querying these models with questions
from these exams how how how has their
performance changed over time yeah I um
I take an exam I gave years ago in my
graduate General activity class at
Stanford and give it to these models and
it's pretty extraordinary three years
ago zero zero uh a year ago they were
doing pretty well maybe a weak student
but in the distribution and now they
essentially Ace the test in fact that
that I'm retiring that that's just my
own little private eval I don't you know
it's not not published anywhere but I
just I just give them this thing just to
follow along how they're doing and it's
pretty it's pretty strong um they you
know may be easy by the standard of
graduate courses but a graduate course
yeah uh in general relativity and they
get um pretty much everything right on
the final exam that's just in the last
couple of months that these these have
been doing that what is required to AC a
test I obviously like they they probably
have like read about all the generality
textbooks but assume to ASA test you
like need something beyond that is there
some way you would characterize physics
problems compared to math problems tend
to have two components one is to sort of
take this word question and like turn it
using your physics knowledge into a a
math question yeah and then solve the
maths question that's that tends to be
the typical structure of these problems
so you need to be able to do both the
bit that's maybe you know only llms can
do and wouldn't be so easy for other
things is is step one of that is like
turning into a math problem yeah um I
think if you ask them hard research
problems you certainly can come up with
problems that they they can't solve
that's that's for sure but it's pretty
noticeable as we have tried to develop
evaluations for these models that as
recently as a couple of years ago
suddenly three years ago you just scrape
from the internet any number of of
problems that are standard totally
standard high school math problems that
they couldn't do and now we need to hire
phds in whatever field and you know they
they come up with one great problem a
day or something you know the difficulty
as these llms have got stronger the
difficulty of evaluating their
performance has has increased how much
do they generalize from these difficult
problems to not only that domain of
physics but just generally becoming a
better Reasoner
overall like they just see like a super
hard gr problem are they like better
coding now generally you see positive
transfer between domains so if you make
them better at one thing they become
better at another thing uh across across
all
domains it is possible to make a model
that is like really really really good
at one very particular thing that you
care about and then at some stage there
is some Pito Frontier and you start
degrading performance on other metrics
but generally speaking there's positive
transfer between abilities across all
domains we've got these literally
exabytes of data that we collected from
uh um satellites and telescopes and
other kinds of astronomical
observations typically in
AI uh when you have lots of data and you
have lots of compute something something
large model gr discoveries is there any
hope of using these exabytes of
astronomical data to do something cool
yeah great question people are trying
that um there's an effort you know shley
ho and and flat iron which is basically
that exact plan is they take the
pipeline of all of the data that comes
out of these astronomical observatories
they big and plug them into a
Transformer and see what happens
um you can come up with all sorts of
reasons in advance why that might not be
something that will work but you could
also come up with reasons in advance why
large language models wouldn't work and
they do so I'm very curious to see what
happens I mean the dream there would be
that you know there's lots of things
hidden in the data that no human would
ever be able to tease out and and that
by doing this you could just
revolutionize the amount of these
astronomical observatories are
incredibly expensive if we can just have
a computer better pass all of the data
from them in a way that no human ever
come could that would be a tremendous
Improvement uh these things are very
good at finding patterns and maybe
they'll find patterns that are not
particularly interesting to a human um
okay so going on the G thread again
maybe one advantage these models have is
obviously you can run a lot of them in
parallel and they don't get fatigued or
dazed and you could imagine again
naively you would imagine some sort of
set I assume you're doing many much more
sophisticated things but naively could
imagine a setup where um uh look it it
seems like what uh uh special relativity
which is something that like maybe it's
easier to understand it's just like you
start off with uh you what's like let's
let's just like randomly select a couple
of observations obviously they were
randomly selected but you know um and
like let just think about what's going
on here for a while you know like let's
just do a bunch of Chain of Thought for
a year or so uh and you could just
imagine doing this and doing some sort
of best of n across like a thousand
different randomly selected
um parts of the current model of the
universe uh and just seeing like at the
end of it which one comes up with some
especially productive line of thought
yeah the I mean I think
that could be productive One Challenge
in that would be how do you evaluate
whether you had a good theory yeah at
the end
um that's going to be the tricky bit
for things that are most easily
paralyzed are things in which if you get
the right answer it's clear you got the
right answer you know perhaps things in
NP one might say whereas in this case is
special relativity how would you how
would your computer know at when if it
generated special activity that it was
onto a winner there are various ways in
which it could know it could check that
it was mathem I Al self-consistent and
and various other facts but the
evaluation is going to be a tricky part
of this pipeline that you might wish to
set up is there an experimental way that
you could detect time dilation or
something there is an experimental way
that you could detect time dilation but
uh that would involve sending out probes
or doing something in the real world
whereas I thought you were just trying
to run this a data CER but now today we
have these xoby of information so you
could just have some sort of like
ability to search or query like ah I
come this okay I think maybe this is a
philosophical difference where you maybe
think that the way that a theory is good
is that it best matches the you know
best predicts the data with some loss
minimization yeah that's not always how
new theories particularly revolutionary
theories come up you know there's this
famous fact even when they were moving
from a geocentric worldview to a
heliocentric worldview that that it was
so beautiful the theory by the time they
were finished with the epicycles Ian not
beautiful it was so ornate
uh By the time where these planets were
moving around the Sun but moving on Epic
cycles that actually the data didn't any
better fit the heliocentric world view
than the geocentric World viw especially
since they didn't properly understand
the electicity of the Earth's orbit
around the sun um so it wasn't why does
one Theory replace another one reason is
obviously that it's more consistent with
the data but that's by no means the only
Theory and if you just optimize for
being consistent with the data you going
to end up with if you optimize only for
being consistent with the data you're
going to end up with epicycles you're
not going to end up with some beautiful
new conceptual thing part of the reason
people like these new theories is that
even though they're may be not better at
matching the data they are more
beautiful and we'd have to teach and
that's been a reliable guide in the
history of Science and we'd have to
teach these llms Beauty so this actually
raises an interesting question which is
look in some sense we have the same
problem with human scientists right and
so there's all these people who claim to
have a new theory of everything and I
guess there's not an easy verifier that
everybody agrees to because some people
call them cranks other people think
they're Geniuses um uh but somehow we've
solved this problem right uh well we've
sort of solved it I mean we haven't
solved it in the same way that you if
you have some new sort algorithm that
you claim is faster than everybody else
sort algorithm there doesn't need to be
any dispute about that you can just run
it and see if it physics is not the same
way it is definitely the case that there
a number of people who think they have
great theories and uh there are even
perfectly respectable you know people
who are professors at prestigious
universities who have very different
opinions about what is and isn't a
worthwhile
uh direction to be exploring eventually
you hope that this gets grounded in
experiment and various other things but
the distance between starting the
research program and uh the community
reaching consensus Based on data and and
other other consider a uh can be a long
time so yeah we we definitely don't have
a good verifier in physics even if we
did some someday get superum
intelligence that could do that could
try to find all the remaining sort of
like highlevel uh conceptual
breakthroughs yeah how much more room is
there for that uh basically have it was
there just like 50 years of like here's
all the really Advanced great physics
and now we just bogg through like uh
additions to the standard model um you
know if you look at Nobel prizes a year
after year year they get less and less
at least in physics they tend to get
like less and less significant and in
fact this year the Nobel Prize in
physics was awarded to um hfield and
Hinton for their work in AI so
apparently yeah maybe a tast a taste of
things to come yeah I don't think
there's reason I don't think we should
be pessimistic about that I think there
could easily be room for completely new
conceptualizations that change things I
don't think it's just turning the crank
going forward
um I think new ways to think about
things have always been extremely
powerful sometimes they're fundamental
breakthroughs sometimes they
are uh breakthroughs in which you even
take regular physics this is a story to
do with renormalization that maybe is a
little too technical to get into but
there was a sort of amazing
understanding in the 1970s about the
nature of theories that have been around
for forever or for for years at that
stage that allowed us to sort of better
understand and conceptualize them um so
I think there's good reason to think
that there's still room for new ideas
and completely new ways of understanding
understanding the universe do you have
some hot take about why the current
physics Community hasn't I mean the
cosmology is maybe a very notable
exception where like it it does seem
like the expected value of the like Co
SL switching back and forth um well if
you take particle physics I think it's
because we were a victim of our own
success is that we wrote down theories
in the
1970s uh and those theories were it's
called the standard model and those
theories were too good uh in the sense
that we won um in the sense that we
could predict everything that would come
out of a particle accelerator and every
particle accelerator that's ever been
built and every particle accelerator
that's likely to be built uh given our
current budging constraints uh so
particle physics I mean there were some
questions around the edges but this
model that we wrote down in the in the
70s and into the 80s basically
completely cleaned up that field we wish
to build bigger more powerful particle
accelerators to find stuff that that
goes beyond that but basically we we won
and uh that makes it difficult to
immediate you know to to immediately uh
if you if you get too good then it's
hard to know know where to push from
there that's as far as particle physics
is concerned is there some so it sounds
like the problem with these gliders is
that the ENT like the expected entropy
is like not that high of like yeah we
the reason it's not that useful is
because like we kind of have some sense
of what we'd get on the other side is
there some experimental apparatus that
we should build where we in fact do have
great uncertainty about what would
happen and so we would learn a lot by
what the result ends up being well the
problem with particle colliders is in
some sense that they got too expensive
um and CERN is is tens of billions of
dollars small number of tens of billions
of dollars to to run this thing um build
AI with that money right yeah I mean
it's super interesting how everybody
talks about how academics can't possibly
compete with the big Labs uh but the
cost of CERN is is larger than the cost
of uh big model training runs so by by a
lot so that's just academics pulling
their money so uh that's that's an
interesting fact
but yeah it it's they got so expensive
that uh uh it's difficult to people to
buy to buy a new one for us that's even
bigger uh you get it's a very natural
thing to do to build an atom smasher
that just smashes things together to
higher energy it's a very natural thing
to see what comes out people were
perhaps somewhat disappointed with the
output of the LHC where it just you know
it made the higs which was great and we
found it but we also expected it to be
there uh and it didn't make anything
else any of these more fanciful
scenarios that or anything basically
unexpected but people had speculated we
see super symetry there or we'd see
extra dimensions and basically that was
a null result we didn't see anything
like that
um I would say we should definitely
build another one if it was uh if it was
cheap to do so uh and we should build
another one once AI has made us all so
rich that it's uh it's cheap to do so
but it's not uh it's not the obvious
place to spend $50 billion if you had
$50 billion to to spend on on science
often it's these smaller experiments
that that are that can be looked for
things in unexpected places uh uh a
decade ago there was bicep which is a
you know reasonably cheap tens of
millions of dollars experiment at the
south pole that thought it had seen some
hints in the cosmic microwave background
of gravitational waves that would have
been revolutionary if true um not worth
doing bicep if it cost $10 billion
definitely worth doing worth doing bicep
if it costs $10 million so there's all
sorts of experiments like that often
observational what is the value of
seeing these primordial gravitational
waves oh it gives you hints uh you're
just examining the night sky very
closely and and seeing hints of what
happened at the Big Bang right so yeah
this is this is a sort of different
approach to doing high energy physics um
which
is why do you want to build a big
collider you want to build a big
collider because uh the bigger the
collider the more high energy you can
smash things together with and heisen
uncertainty principle says that high
energy means short resolution you can
see things on very small scales uh
that's great except the cost to build
them is there's some scaling laws and
those scaling laws are not particularly
friendly
uh there is
another sort of approach that one might
say which is you know there was a
ginormous explosion uh that happened
which was the Big Bang um you know if
you
imagine uh if we look out in the
universe it's expanding if you sort of
play the tape backwards it's Contracting
eventually all contracts at 13.8 billion
years ago in in in the Big Bang right um
and and so that's a very big particle
collider indeed um and so by just
examining very closely the big bang and
it's aftermath we're able to hopefully
probe some of these quantities that are
very difficult to probe with particle
cers the disadvantage is that it's you
just you can't keep running it and
adjust the parameters as you see fit
it's just like one thing that happened
once and now we're having to peer
backwards to uh with our telescopes to
see what happened but it can give hints
about things that would be inaccessible
with any future future is there
information about the distant past that
is in principle inaccessible probably
not in principle so something happened
to the
universe uh in in its Evolution which is
that the very early Universe just after
the big bang was opaque to light we can
only see light past about 300,000 years
after the put bit of Big Bang uh before
that everything's so dense it's like a
just a dense plasma that light just gets
absorbed by it's like trying to look
through the Sun and so we cannot see
directly anything from before 300,000
years nevertheless we can infer lots of
stuff that happened from before 300,000
years in fact looking at that light
what's called The Cosmic microwave
background that was emitted at that time
we infer lots of stuff about just due to
the patterns of anisotropies that we see
in the sky we can infer a great deal
about what was happening earlier and
most of our confidence about modern
cosmology comes from a number of
experiments that starting in the ' 80s
but accelerating in the 2000s really
very carefully measured that anisotropy
and allowed us to infer stuff before
that at the information theoretic level
there's nothing in
accessible uh I guess that makes sense
the conservation of information maybe
you'll tell me that that also isn't that
also isn't true well that's a that's a
great question I mean there's been a lot
of debate in the black hole context
about whether information is conserved
by black but the modern consensus is
that it is look if you're enjoying this
conversation you should consider working
for my sponsor Jane Street they're a
very successful quantitative trading
firm physicists do particularly well in
trading because they can combine hard
Applied Mathematics with a bunch of
empirical and theoretical considerations
in fact Adam once filed for a patent
using quantum entanglement and violation
of Bell's inequality to do relativistic
Arbitrage I I don't understand what that
means maybe I should have asked Adam but
if you do you should go work for Jane
Street Jane Street is Keen to hire smart
curious and rigorous people who want to
work on interesting technical problems
you can join Jane Street not just from
physics but also other technical Fields
like math and CS they're always hiring
full-time and their summer internship
applications are open for just a few
more weeks and they're filling up fast
if you really want to stand out check
out their kagle competition
go to Jan street.com
dwares to learn more and there's also a
really interesting video there about
their ml work that you should check out
all right back to Adam all right Adam
what are your tips for hitchhiking oh
good
question uh so I I hit shaked uh a bunch
around around America and and Europe
I've done you know Oxford to Morocco uh
when I moved from Princeton out to
Sanford I hitchhiked a bunch of other
times down to New Orleans various other
places um I think the probably the
biggest tip for hitchhiking is to stand
in a good place some counterparty
modeling imagine the person who's
picking you up they need time to see you
to evaluate you and to decide they're
going to pick you up and then to safely
stop and that all needs to happen so
stand somewhere where people can see you
possibly at a stoplight and where
there's a place for them to safely pull
over how do you model the motivations of
people who pick you up what are they
getting out of this
um I think it's different for different
people I think about 20% of people will
just always pick up hitch stakers no
matter what even if
I'd you know was dressed very
differently and presented very different
I think some people would just pick pick
people up no matter what I basically
fall into that category now was
hardcoded into my brain that I will 100%
pick up hitchhikers always under all
circumstances just because enough people
have generously picked me up down the
years that I just feel as though it's my
my duty and sort of not not subject to a
cost benefit analysis just it's in there
um many other people are evaluating you
and just you know trying to decide what
what you're in for some people are
lonely and want somebody to talk to some
people have a just a spirit of Adventure
and find it exciting to pick pick people
up certainly it's not a representative
crosssection of people I would say
there's definitely a selection bias and
who picks you up they tend to be more
open and more risk tolerant and what
what was your motivation for
did you were you just in need of a car
or what was going on No I um enjoy
meeting people and it's I enjoy the
experience of meeting people and
weird episodic uh sense of which just
you never know what's going to happen I
think I have a very high tolerance for
ambiguity and I enjoy that what was the
percentage of we just had a normal
conversation they went in the general
direction I was going and that was that
versus I've got a crazy story to tell
about EX in what percentages each H I
think some people are just totally
normal
people families moving their child to
college and you get there and you help
them you know move some stuff into the
DOR room just to just to thank you all
the way through to absolutely wild uh
cases probably 20% just like this is one
of the craziest things that ever
happened uh in one way or another yeah
any particular examples about of wild oh
yeah huge I mean it's just absolutely
fire hose of of wild things uh happening
um tell so many stories like I remember
once there was a a trucker who picked me
up in the the desert outside Salt Lake
City and who who drove me to battle
station Nevada and
who as we were talking the truckers are
always in fact the most interesting of
all um it's it's typically illegal or
anyway in violation of their Employment
contract for them to pick people up so
those guys are really um and it's always
guys are are really pushing the envelope
um in terms of picking you up the
truckers often will say you're the first
person I've had in my cab in 20 years of
trucking or something and then they tell
you about 20 years worth of things that
have been on their mind uh so I'd say
that those are often uh the really
interesting ones as I said there's this
one in in Utah who was just just talked
from the moment I got into the cab um
until we got to Nevada and I kind of got
the feeling that he had sort of excess
mental capacity and that this was his
you know he was now just going to dump
it uh on me and uh he was telling me all
about his life um and I remember this
very well how his brother-in-law thought
he was a loser his his sister's husband
but like now we had the hot fiance so
who was the loser and then just sort of
gradually over the course of the six
hours it just suddenly occurred to me
that his fiance was doing Advanced feif
fraud on him and the whole thing was
some ginormous and he was being scammed
uh by his fiance and very unfortunately
for them they tried to execute the scam
while he had me in the cab and he never
had anyone in his cab so now he had me
in his cab and they were trying to do
some fraud on him and I was able to they
had some wheat Factory in Wales uh
United Kingdom that they had some
British High Court Document say that he
was entitled to if he paid off theen on
it there was some long complicated story
that was sort of totally
flagrantly false and I kind of felt like
I had a moral obligation to him to break
the news to him on the other hand we
were in the middle of nowhere in Nevada
and it was clearly a very important part
of his personality that this was so um
so I kind of waited until we got close
and
said is it possible
that your fiance is being scammed by
these people and you know sort of raised
notion of scamming and um and he was
willing to intellectually entertain the
possibility and then we got got a bit
closer and is it possible that that you
were yourself being scammed by your
fiance and and and then he was like no
no no it can't be and he had all these
documents to show that it was all legit
and they were just sort of to somebody
from a British legal background
transparent forgeries and I mean he did
eventually accept it and was just crying
on my shoulder in some truck stop um it
was quite you know High paos moment
um and then said uh this happened before
and it turned out he'd previously been
scammed in the same way or a similar way
through somebody he'd met through the
same
match.com profile that was his lucky
profile cuz you know people kept
messaging him through it um so we you
know we we talked through that and work
through that and like I felt in some
ways I'd been his his Guardian Angel and
uh but he you know he'd also be been my
guardian angel and picked me up in the
middle of the desert so there was some
there was some great exchange there
that's that's
crazy um I I I hope you close down that
profile I hope so I mean we you know I
did chat to him about that that
possibility and he wasn't fully bought
in on it but uh yeah yeah what's the uh
what's the longest you've been strin it
somewhere uh that would probably be one
time in richond Virginia uh in some not
particularly good neighborhood trying to
Hitch out of there um I think that was
about a day um which is really bad
that's really bad like sometimes if you
get a good spot um that's worth a
thousand miles just don't don't give it
up just for a short hop anywhere if you
get a bad spot get out of there on any
means necessary because there's because
there's probably a THX variants and how
high quality hitchhiking spots are I
would say how did you find the time to
like get stranded for a day at an end uh
you know it doesn't take in terms of
intensity it doesn't really take that
much uh wall clock time uh as we say
it's coast to coast is um
you know like a week or so it's pretty
fast because you you don't you're not
yourself driving in that sense it's
easier you do have to wait and you know
there is definitely High variance uh how
long you can be but in terms of sort of
instance per minute it's it's a pretty
good way to see the world and you see
such a cross-section of people who I
might never never otherwise meet and
such a sort of high variance
cross-section everything from sort of
idol millionaires cruising around the
country looking for adventure to people
who just squ out of prison to uh in one
memorable instant well it eventually
transpired as we were going along that
they were uh they had they were actually
just teenagers and I didn't somehow
didn't clock that when getting in the
car and they they had stolen the family
car and were were driving West um uh
without a plan and that yeah there I
gave him a talk talking to and uh bought
them dinner uh and some some life advice
so that was uh some f stuff I got uh did
you make them call their parents and I
did make them call their parents yes um
or you know heavily encouraged them to
call their parents is there Lu to get
the
professor yeah none none none of these
people typically realize that uh you
know your academic background never
really comes up in conversation
typically I mean some sometimes it does
but typically that's that's not the
nature of the conversations was there
any time you felt particularly
unsafe I have definitely felt more
unsafe picking up hitchhikers than I
have hitchhiking maybe I just got got
lucky but picking up hitchhikers there
it tends to be um you know no one really
Pi picks up hitchhikers uh anymore and
there's definitely a selection effect on
who's hitking right um I have definitely
felt more in risk of my life with hiters
I picked up than I ever did hitchiking
but you know it's possible I just got
lucky you don't see the other branches
of the way function what um yeah what
are the other interesting insights from
just getting this random cross-section
yeah all all sorts of facts a lot of
people just like to talk there's a lot
of lot of people out there and I like to
talk too so it's mutually beneficial
well the uh truckers I imagine are
especially key to those those guys
they're interesting um yeah they're all
they're all cheating their logs they
have certain logs about how long they
can travel for and at least every single
one who's ever picked me up maybe maybe
it's correlated with their willingness
to pick up hitchhikers has all been in
some way or another gaming the system of
of their their logs about how long
they're allowed to drive for um and and
playing games with time zones and stuff
like that
um and they they typically yeah they
they're they're smart people and they
just have a lot to say and don't really
have any to say to so they're very
grateful uh what are they what are they
especially insightful
about they tend to have listened to a
huge number of audiobooks they have a
enormous amount of information stored in
their brain but nobody to tell it to um
also many of them tend to have
had unlucky romances at some stage in
their part
that they've never got over or spoken to
and I really as many of them would do
well to speak to a therapist but you are
the therapist in that case so you know
in many ways people will tell you things
that frequently people will say things
like I've never told anybody else this
in my life before that's common not just
the truckers other people as well I mean
sometimes it's you know family is
picking you up and so they're not going
to say that but often it's just
um often it's just you know single
people picking you up and they'll
they'll say I've never said this before
to anyone else in my life and you know
they they tell you some story of of
their life and I do think it's obviously
I'm very grateful to them for driving me
you know down the road but I think also
it's an exchange and they're also
getting quite a lot out of the
conversation um I remember one case
going to New Orleans somebody
just meant to only only take us you know
M I think it was just there some state
trooper come along in in South Carolina
and was going to arrest us because it's
illegal in some states to uh hitch
likeke and uh North Carolina and so I
like I just take the next ride and it
was just 10 miles down the road and he
ended up getting sort of so into it that
we ended up driving up you know maybe a
thousand miles out of his way by home
be' gone and he'd had this uh you know
we having great conversations just
absolutely sort of wonderful time and he
just wanted to keep going and going and
drive us uh through the night and then
we ended up going through the Deep South
in the middle of the night and arriving
in near New Orleans
around Dawn and he he'd had a father who
uh had been in the military but he'd
kind of had a difficult relationship
with and uh ended up going and visiting
his father's grave in in Batton Rouge
never having done that in the 20 years
since his since his father died but just
as this sort of turned I mean he just
was driving along expecting to go home
and then just turned into this sort of
spiritual quest for him so you know
stuff like that can be pretty gratifying
uh it's also sort of cheating you're not
in my way of thinking about it meant to
be taking people out of their way like
they're meant to be going where they're
going and you go with them and they take
you no further but in this case I think
he he needed to go uh there so that was
good for him did you stay in contact
with any of the people your chck
typically no and I would almost consider
it um poor form to do so but um actually
there was
um there was one lady who was a who came
to yeah came to stay in New York uh
later and she was going down to Haiti to
sort of be a doctor there she was a
doctor and so I stayed in contact with
her a bit but typically this you know
it's just the nature of the interaction
is that this is uh you have this sort of
beautiful moment in time together and
then and then that's it
yeah uh any other tips that somebody
should know I mean should they do this
anymore given that it's largely uncommon
and so uncommon types of people might
pick you up I I think it used to be very
common in the United States it's still
reasonably common in in Europe it used
to be very common in the United States
and then there were some Mass murderers
who uh drove the popularity down by
targeting
hitchhikers maybe this is just pure COPE
in my mind you need to worry about that
less because if you are a mass murderer
it's really you know serial killer it's
not not really a high expected value
strategy to cruise around looking for
hitchikers since there's so few of them
um but that that does might pure COPE in
my head I've never refused a ride for
safety grounds but I would I hope I
would if if necessary sometimes you
would refuse a ride because somebody's
only going a short distance and you're
in a good hitchhiking spot it's kind of
Bad Karma to refuse a ride but sometimes
sometimes you should do that other tips
don't
um don't write your exact destination on
your sign uh write the sort of direction
in which you're going uh the reason is
is maybe twofold one a lot of people if
they're heading towards that place but
not going to that place will not stop
because they think oh I'm not going to
wher wherever it is I better I better
not you know I'm not going there so I
won't pick you up even though you'd very
much appreciate a partial ride there the
other reason is if you do want to
decline a ride it's certainly a lot
easier to do so if the person you says
oh I'm going to that
city um right that's hard where if they
if if they say they're going to that
City and you've frighten something more
vague on your side it's maybe easier to
decline a ride um if you want to get out
of the car the classic and there is to
say that you you get in and you feel
unsafe um is to say that you're car sick
because you know even serial killers
don't want uh vomit in their car so
that's a good reason to get out and then
you just say okay I'll just I'll just
stay here that's another that's another
trick I've never had to deploy that oh I
was just about you no I've never had to
deploy that typically it's pretty like
there's a moment of like anxiety in the
first minute um but then after a minute
it's clear that everybody's and they're
also I mean they're also anxious about
you and you know many ways you can tell
that they're quite nervous about you um
uh and then after a minute it's clear
that everybody's uh if not a sensible
human being then at least a safe human
being and uh everything's super relaxed
for the rest of the ride typically any
other strange people who picked you off
that come to mind not necessarily
strange but just like uh memorable so
many different kinds of people
um yeah I remember um
there was one like seemingly very
successful Cowboy but you know Cowboy
some driving some fancy truck in Wyoming
and had a you know big her of cattle and
all the rest of it and was just asking
me actually somewhat unusually of asking
me what I do and so you at that time I
was doing cosmology so I sort of trying
to explain to him and it just had no
totally disconnecting with anything just
didn't understand a word I was saying
all the way through and eventually we
landed on the fact that the stars in the
sky are just like the sun only much
further away and this was a fact that in
his life up to that stage he just never
encountered and it that was extremely
gratifying because he
um he was blown away by that fact like
he he wasn't he was totally
intellectually capable of understanding
it he just never in his 50 years of
existence up to that moment ever um ever
heard that fact and his mind was just
totally racing uh this this was
reorienting his picture of his place in
the the universe must be so big if there
was stars out there and he founded his
wife who I think was somewhat less
excited and then took me to a gun store
and brought me lunch uh and you know it
was it was he was a Rancher he was a
Rancher he was seemingly a very
successful Rancher based on everything
uh about him but had he had some prize
high quality bulls that were uh that
were some rare kind of uh high quality
blls I I can't exactly remember the
details but yeah he just never really
contemplated what the guy meant for him
there's uh there's a Sherlock H story
where uh Holmes Run learns that actually
the sun is the center of the solar
system oh interesting um and then the
the logic is Watson tells him this and
Holmes is like [__] why did you tell me
this uh I try to like reserve mental
space for things that are actually
relevant to my work now I gotta like
forget
this yeah the hitri is going to the
Galaxy
yeah uh what did you learn from uh
studying the firstand account of the
Nagasaki bombers oh yeah that was okay
so during the pandemic um my my landlord
has a big library and I just started
reading uh you know during deep lockdown
some books in the library and there was
just some sort of so where do you stay
that you're a landlord oh I um you got
an apartment complex Library I live in a
house that was uh used to belong to the
chair of the English Department at um
Stanford and then her by grandson who
rent it to me and it was um he has a
very extensive Library very interesting
and uh I was like you know going through
it during during first lockdown and came
across this like super
enigmatic statement in some book about
the history of Japan and um was like
super fascinated by it uh and started uh
for reasons that I'll explain in a
moment then just became obsessed for a
few months on reading absolutely
everything I could about the bombing of
Nagasaki which is the most recent
nuclear weapon ever to be set off during
wartime um and was you know reasonably
controversial cuz people question
whether it we should have done it uh or
not and
um and that wasn't the question I was
looking at actually the question I was
looking at wasn't um should they have
ordered it to be done but were the
people who did it even following orders
um and it's a pretty wild story that I
didn't know certainly before any of this
happened which is uh it was never meant
to be a miss to Nagasaki it was meant to
be a mission to bom kukura a different
Japanese City but they got there and it
was clouded over and they had like very
strict instructions do not bomb if
unless you can see the target uh and
that that was that was the order do not
bomb unless you can see the Target and
they got to this other city and they
passed over a bunch of times and they
couldn't see the target it was covered
in clouds uh so then they went to their
secondary Target Nagasaki and it was
again covered in clouds and they did a
whole bunch of passes um and they made
various mess ups the Bomber Crew had
beforehand including getting lost
and they made a number of mistakes uh
personal flying mistakes on their part
that meant that they didn't have enough
fuel once they got to Nagasaki to carry
the bomb uh back back to base basically
uh and they probably have ended up in
the ocean had they tried um so they were
extremely motivated uh you know at the
time this was the only nuclear weapon
that EX existed in the world we'd used
we'd had two and then it went down to
one and and now there was one and they
were just about to drop it in the ocean
and lose it uh so according to the
official account after having done all
this uh on the third and final pass over
Nagasaki there was a uh miraculous hole
in the cloud that suddenly opened
up uh and then they dropped it um and uh
that that story is a bit sus um for if
for no other reason them that they
actually missed uh little known fact
they missed Nagasaki uh they were they
were aiming for one point and they hit
another point that was on the other side
of the Hill such that the original thing
they were aiming for was you know
reasonably untouched uh by comparison
for the fact that nuclear weapon had
been dropped they missed by much more
than you would miss if you were doing
visual bombing and they theyve been told
to do visual bombing so this kind of
Suspicion is that they were doing a
little bit of radar bombing against
direct orders so is it possible that 50%
of all of the nuclear weapons ever
dropped in combat were in fact dropped
against direct orders which is you know
if true that's a pretty uh
striking uh fact about nuclear war since
people are somewhat worried with nuclear
war that someone will launch nuclear
weapons uh without being ordered to do
so and it does kind of look like 50% of
all the nuclear weapons ever dropped in
combat were dropped against direct
orders and when they got back um Curtis
L was going to feel was going to
Court Marshal them uh and was like super
mad but then the war ended and they
didn't want to do it for PR reasons so I
I just ordered and found every account
ever written by every person super
fascinating to do that because uh all
these different people had completely
non overing lives you know some of them
were um you know were on the Manhattan
Project and were there of observers and
wa to later win Nobel prizes physics and
some of them were just uh people who
were just you know there for one one
moment so no
um themselves were on the plane there
was yeah in on every there was typically
a um a physicist a representative of the
Manhattan Project on on the plane just
in just in case so Lou aalz was someone
there he actually wasn't on the Nagasaki
Mission he was on the hirosima mission
uh but in his biography he's like they
said they saw a hole in the clouds I I
don't think I believe them so so like
that was like I think one of the hints
it was maybe reading his you know at
some stage reading his biog
autobiography that that was one of the
big hints the other people insist there
was but what's super clear is that
whether or not there was a hole in the
clouds and probably there was a hole in
the clouds just because of some of the
technical things to do with the uh their
discussion though it's definitely not
obvious what's clear is that whether or
not there was a ho in clouds they
certainly you know had decided in the
cockpit on that final run that no matter
what they were going to drop
so even if there wasn't a hole in the CL
was a hole in the clouds wasn't a hole
in the clouds they had decided to drop
the nuclear weapons against direct
orders and as they had written like
basically like oh we totally saw hold
the clouds but even if we hadn't we
would have dropped it that basically is
yeah so different people write different
things how many were on the plan there's
about 10 people on these
PL not all of them were um you know some
of them were some ways away from where
the action is happening there's the
bombarder who says that uh that he saw a
hole in the clouds there's the pilot who
says something but everyone has their
own different perspective and some of
the perspectives are just totally this
is something that I guess I'd always
been told by my history teachers but
never really appreciated until I'd done
this 360 view of history that people can
describe the same events and just they
have flatly inconsistent uh memories of
each other nobody who was on the plane
said that they faked the hole in the
cloud story but some people who were on
the plane said they were determined to
drop the bomb no matter what and they
were highly incentivized to do this cuz
if had they not done it they'd have
probably as it was they only barely made
it back to their emergency landing spot
in okanawa um that you know they would
have definitely ended up uh in in the
drink and certainly the bomb would have
ended up in the drink have they not done
it so so I I don't know I mean I'm not a
professional historian and uh maybe
there'll be difference of opinions but
it's it's clear there was something
highly sus about at least 50% of all the
nuclear weapons dropped in combat I mean
the interesting thing is that the reason
nuclear war was averted in other cases
is also because they refused to follow
direct orders right in this case right
uh or in the case of petv he uh didn't
report the seeming sighting of nukm
America uh and that that obviously
contradicts orders yeah there's nuclear
insubordination in both directions there
like there's like the good kind where
they they uh sort of maybe should drop
the bomb according to their orders and
and refuse to and then there's the other
kind yeah I also want to ask so um
you've had not only one remarkable
career but two remarkable careers so in
uh uh you know you have you've in
physics you've uh you're close
collaborator with people like Leonard
Sask and you've done all this
interesting research um now uh you're
helping do the reasoning work that
Google de mind's working on uh in AI um
uh is there some chronology you have in
your head about how your career has
transpired or oh I don't um impose
narratives on it like that it it's
certainly a big um
very big contrast between doing physics
uh and writing retail papers as it were
retail you know doing one by one writing
physics papers and then doing uh AI
which moves just tremendously faster uh
and doing you know trying to contribute
to the sort of wholesale production of
knowledge in that way um yeah and they
have very different impacts in terms of
counterfactual impact physics like you
write some papers and you're like had I
not written that paper no one would
written that paper for years or ever
perhaps um computer science doesn't feel
like that it feels like if you didn't do
it someone else would do it uh pretty
soon thereafter on the other hand the
impact you know even a few days of
impact in computer science these things
are going to change the world hopefully
for the better to to such a large degree
that that's much bigger than potentially
all the physics papers you ever wrote so
that's interesting you say that about
you feel that that uh physics is
physicists are not fungible in the same
way the story about why physics has
slowed down is usually that in fact
there isn't any low hanging fruit and
the idea that you would discover
something that somebody wouldn't have
written about for many years to come um
I had a couple double negatives there
but basically like you're not going to
um you know we like found all the things
that are you can just like write a paper
about and you're not just going to like
think about something and find something
that somebody else wouldn't have r about
otherwise um but here you're saying the
the field that's moving way faster which
is computer science that's the one where
like all these people are going to you
know come up with your uh algorithms if
you hadn't come up with them yourself um
and it's physics where if you had more
Leonard sukin and Adam Browns you would
have a much faster progress potentially
well partly there's just so many more
people working on the problems in
computer science than there are in
physics there's just the number of
people is part of what makes the
counterfactual mean like how many
theoretical physicists are there versus
how many people are working on like uh
AI research AI research around the world
there's you know I don't know how many
people are in like thousands and
thousands and thousands physics it's 100
200 300 well in the narrow domain of you
know high energy theoretical physics I
mean there's there's there's many more
physics than that if you include people
more generally but they're sufficiently
specialized I mean that's partly part of
the reason is that it's much more
specialized field so in a very
specialized field the number of people
who would actually write that paper is a
much smaller number how much do you
ascribe the uh slowness of physics to um
these kinds of things that are just
intrinsic to any field that is as
specialized in as mature versus to uh uh
any any particular dysfunctions of
physics as a field yeah we look back on
the Golden Era of physics you know in uh
you know from the 19 1900 through 1970s
or something you know as as a as a
period when things happened I do think
there is a loow hanging fruit aspect to
it I mean we already talked about how
the standard model is so successful in
terms of particle colliders that it's
just hard to hard to make rapid progress
thereafter um so I don't really see it
as a dysfunction of the field so much as
being a victim of our own
success uh having said that does physics
have fats does physics have Fashions
does physics have any of these other
things absolutely it does but quite how
much factual progress we'd make if if
that weren't true I don't know how well
calibrated are the best physicists it
doesn't necessarily pay to be well
calibrated uh and that incentive
structure is perhaps uh reflected in the
poor calibration of many of the best
physicists first of all because physics
is a sufficiently mature field uh a lot
of good eyed all the good ideas that
look like good ideas have already been
had or many of them um where we're at
now is the good ideas that look like bad
ideas
uh so in order to motivate yourself to
you know get over the hump uh of uh get
through the get over the barrier and
actually explore them you need a little
bit
of irrational optimism uh to write out
uh the uh the initial discouraging
things that you'll discover as you go
along so I would say that typically
theoretical physicists are not
particularly well calibrated and tend to
be uh in love with all their own
theories uh and make highly uh confident
predictions about their own theories
before the LHC turned on there was
certainly a lot of high energy theorists
making extremely confident predictions
about what we'd see at the LHC and it
was typically their own favorite
particle that we'd see and uh while I'd
love to have found super symmetry it
would have in some sense felt somewhat
unjust to reward the hubis of people
making overconfident and poorly
calibrated predictions so um yeah that's
definitely a thing that happens but I I
wonder if poor calibration on the
individual level is somehow optimal on
the collective level yeah I think that's
basically right I mean the same is kind
of true of in other domains of life as
well of course you know startups if you
if you were properly calibrated about
How likely your startups to succeed
would be maybe you wouldn't do it but
it's good for the ecosystem that certain
people are willing to uh give it a go um
yeah I think it's good for the ecosystem
and perhaps uh bad for the individual to
to be well calibrated yeah one of the
reasons I can actually do this podcast
why I can just you know for my job
pepper people like Adam with questions
for a few hours is because I figured out
a business model that makes it work and
I was able to do that through stripe in
fact I built the business itself using
stripe Atlas that's how I set up the LLC
behind the business and I use stripe to
invoice all my advertisers because
sponsorships are my Revenue model but
when you're launching a new product you
need to develop a revenue model and that
can be just as crucial as the product
itself that's why stripe built stripe
billing stripe billing is the advanced
billing software you need to grow any
business from seed-based subscriptions
to usage based billing and every single
pricing model in between stripe billing
helps you grow your business and do it
your way and do so fast because that's
important learn how stripe billing can
help your business at stripe.com
billing all right back to Adam another
topic I know you studied a lot uh is how
one might mind a black hul oh oh yeah
right I read a paper about that very
good yeah um tell me about it okay so uh
what do you may mean by mine black hole
M black hole means take the energy out
of a black hole that used to be in a
black hole obviously if our distant
descendants have used up all of the
energy and stars and everything else uh
the black hole might be the last thing
they turn their eye to um yeah so can
you get energy out of black holes at all
uh the old story pre 1970s is no like
it's just black hole is One Way matter
Falls in it never comes out it's stuck
uh the thing that Hawking and
beckenstein discovered in the' 70s is
that once quantum mechanics is involved
that's not true anymore once quantum
mechanics is involved in fact energy
even without you doing anything starts
to leave black holes uh the problem as
far as our assistant descendants will be
concerned is that it leaves back holes
extremely slowly so if you took a Sol
Mass black hole same mass as the sun
just collapse to form a black hole
there'll be this little quantum what's
called Hawking radiation nowadays little
Quantum Hawking radiation in which the
energy will leech out again very very
slowly uh and the temperature of a of a
solar mass black hole is measured in
nanokelvin so very low temperature so
the energy leak leeches out uh when
something that cold you know so cold you
couldn't even see it in the cosmic
background uh it leeches out incredibly
slowly back into the universe and that's
bad news because it means the energy
comes out super duper slowly so the the
mining question uh is can you speed that
up a solar mass black hole if you don't
help it will take about 10^ the 55 times
the current age of the universe to have
given out all its energy back into the
universe can you make that faster and
there were these proposals stretching
back a few decades that you could you
could do what's called mining black
holes
where we see the Hawking radiation that
escapes when we're a very long way away
from the black hole but actually
mathematically it's known that much of
the Hawking radiation doesn't escape it
just sort of makes it a little bit out
of the black hole and then falls back in
again and there was this proposal that
you could going to reach in with a
mechanical claw obviously not crossing
the Horizon because otherwise you've
lost the claw and you're somewhat
counterproductive but like just just
outside the Horizon just grab some of
that Hawking radiation and just drag it
a long way away from the black hole and
then and then Feast on it or do whatever
it is you want to do with it and in that
way you could what's called mine a black
hole you could speed up the evaporation
of a black hole by a huge Factor so in
that the lifetime would no longer go
like the mass cubed like it does with
just uned hawen radiation but would
scale like just the mass so considerably
faster uh for a uh large black hole um
and so this was these proposals and what
I had a somewhat sort of pessimistic
contribution to the story which is that
the existing proposals did not work they
didn't work to speed it up and in fact
uh you can't speed it up uh you can't
get down that M Cub down to M you can't
in fact get it anything less than M
cubed it still scales like the mass
cubed the the length of time you need to
wait to get all the energy out of a
black hole still scales like the mass
cubed and what goes wrong is ultimately
A Material Science problem so this this
this scoop that comes down really close
to the Horizon uh now from one point of
view that's just like a space elevator
or all be at a very high performance
space elevator space elevators you'll
remember are these ideas for how we
might get things off the surface of the
Earth without using Rockets and the idea
is is that you have uh some massive
orbiting object sort of very long way
away Beyond geostationary orbit and then
you dangle off that rope down to the
surface of the Earth and then you can
essentially just climb up the Rope to
get out that's the space elevator idea
and already around Earth it it's hitting
pretty hard Material Science constraints
so if you want to make a space elevator
the trouble with making a space elevator
isn't so much supporting the payload
that you're trying to have climb up it
is merely just the Rope supporting its
own weight because each bit of the Rope
needs to support not only its own weight
but also the weight of all of the Rope
beneath it m uh so the tension that you
require keeps getting more and more and
more as you as you go up at the bottom
there is no tension effect it doesn't
even touch the Earth it's not like a
compression structure that's like a
skyscraper that's pushed up from below
it's a tension structure that's held up
from above uh but as you go up because
the T you need more and more tension you
also need to make the Rope thicker and
thicker and thicker and if you try and
on Earth or around Earth build a space
elevator out of steel say it just
doesn't work steel is not strong enough
uh you need to keep doubling the
thickness until by the time you get to
geostationary orbit the thickness of the
steel rope is more than the size of the
Earth like the whole thing just doesn't
just doesn't work at all uh but carbon
nanot tubes are this material that we
just we've discovered that are much
stronger than steel so in fact around
Earth carbon nanot tubes will just about
work if we can make them long enough and
pure enough
and uh then they will be strong enough
that we will be able to build a space
elevation around Earth in you know maybe
sometime in the next next Century that
you only need a couple of doublings of
the thickness of the carbon nanot tubes
uh along its entire entire length so
carbon nanot tubes work great around
Earth but they are totally
inadequate for black holes for black
holes you know the CR the critical
Material Science property you need for
this for this rope is the tensile
strength to mass per unit length ratio
it needs to be strong height tensol
strength but low weight like Light low
mass per unit length and that's the
critical ratio and carbon nanot tubes is
you know 10 the minus uh 12 or something
on that on that scale and that is simply
not strong enough at all uh in fact what
I showed in my paper is that you need a
tensil strength the weight ratio that is
a strong as is consistent with the laws
of nature so in fact the laws of nature
bound this quantity the finiteness of
the speed of light means you cannot have
an arbitrarily strong rope with a given
mass per unit length there is a bound
set by the C squ uh in some in some
units that bounds the maximum possible
tensol strength that any rope can have
any rope in fact that has that an
example of a rope that has that is a
string so a string is um I mean a
fundamental string from string the is an
example of a hypothetical rope that is
just strong enough to to violate to
saturate that bound that strength bound
and then the problem is is the following
the problem is that if you have a rope
uh that saturates the bound as strong as
any rope can be uh it is just strong
enough to support all of its own weight
exactly on the edge there and with
exactly no strength left over to support
any payload it might wish to carry and
that's ultimately what Dooms these
mining black holes you know these rapid
mining black hole proposals and what
happens if you try to make the Rope
stronger well you can't um
what you know one example of a thing
that goes wrong is the speed of sound in
a rope
is uh goes up with the tension and down
with the mass ponent length and if you
try and use a rope that's stronger than
this or some hypothetical rope you would
find that the speed of sound is greater
than the speed of light and that's a
pretty good indication what is the speed
of sound so if you just take a rope you
know stretch between you and me and ping
it there will be uh little vibrations
that that that head over towards you and
those vibrations a subluminal if it's
just a normal rope or move at the speed
of light for a string or something that
saturates knowy knowy addition and would
be faster than the speed of light for
some you know that would be an example
of of why you know there's something
wrong with that
propos so it just happens to be the case
that the r cannot mine black holes um I
think we've mentioned a couple other
bounds like this where there's no uh in
principal reason you might have
anticipated X antie why there would be
such a bound that prevents something
that just like kind of gets in our way
um but it just so happens to be this way
um is does this suggest that there's
some sort of like deeper conservation
principle we'd be violating and then
like the universe conspires to create
these engineering difficulties which uh
limit that yes nothing is ever a
coincidence so usually um you know from
the perspective of the story I just told
to do with mining black holes it's not
clear
what exactly will be broken about the
universe if you could M black hole
somewhat faster than than we can there
are other
symmetry there are other ways of
thinking about it in which if you could
make a string that was you know that was
strong enough to actually do it uh if
you could make a rope that was Stronger
Than This bound that various other
things would go wrong there are various
symmetry arguments that that can't
happen um but yeah usually uh often it
turns out if we have these bounds
that there's something that that sort of
saturates the bound or gets very close
to the bound and that's a sign that
you're that you're on the right lines
with some of these bounds on the right
lines in what sense as in uh if you have
a bound but you can't can't think how to
get close to the bound that's usually an
indication that you need to think closer
because often these bounds are
uh often these bounds if you're clever
enough there's a way to get to the pound
there's no rule that it has to be so but
that's that's often that's often the
case that someone will come up with a
bound someone will come up with and
there'll be a gap between the bound and
and how close we can get and
usually more Ingenuity will take you up
to the bound I guess the thing I'm
curious about is why it would be the
case that like uh uh such a bound would
exist in the first place and how often
do you run into these things where U
basically are you expecting to discover
something in the future about like why
it had to be this way that you can't uh
mine black holes like something would be
violated about like that tells us
something important about black hole is
that they can be mined um and it's
deeper than the tensile strength of the
string that would be required to mine it
yeah good question I I started these
investigations because it offended my
intuition for various information
theoretic reasons the idea that black
holes could be mined uh you know with
parametric speeds UPS um when I thought
harder about it the reasons why I
thought that couldn't happen didn't
really uh make sense so in in this
particular case maybe someone will come
up with a reason I don't actually have
atically strong reason why they can't be
mined anymore except that they can't
okay so we can't get the material out of
the black hole in a at a pace that would
make it like reasonably useful to us
what can we do with black holes what
what are they good for if you have a
small black hole uh you can get stuff
out of them uh more rapidly the the
temperature of a black hole is inversely
proportional size so one thing that
people have talked about with black
holes is using them to extract all of
the energy from matter so uh as you know
most chemical reactions are pretty
inefficient you you you burn gasoline
and you extract as a as a function of
the rest mass of the gasoline that that
you started with you extract one part in
10 billion of of energy from the from
the gasoline that you started with so
that that's bad from the point of view
you know have MC squared worth in in a
gallon of gasoline you've got a full MC
squared worth of energy in there and you
can only get out one part in 10 10
that's a pretty unsatisfactory
situation roughly speaking the reason
that all chemical processes are so
inefficient uh is that they only address
the electromagnetic energy in the
electrons and very small fraction of the
electromagnetic energy in an electron in
in atoms is stored in the
electromagnetic interaction between the
between the electrons and between the
nucleus and the electrons most most of
it is stored in the nucleus itself in
the strong nuclear forces and
particularly in the rest mass of the
protons and neutrons that constitute it
so uh you can do much better if instead
of doing electromagnetic interactions
you use nuclear interactions that that
can probe the energy in uh turning
protons into neutrons that's why nuclear
power plants are so much more efficient
on a per Mass basis than
chemical power plants like coal plants
or or gas plants uh because you're
getting a much higher fraction you you
know best case scenario you're getting
one part in 10 the three um or 10 the
four of the rest mass of the uranium
that you start with uh you're extracting
as energy but even there uh in even in
that process uh it's still only you know
absolute best one part in the thousand
of the rest mass and the reason is that
you
are using where much more of the energy
is stored which is the strong and weak
interactions between the protons and
neutrons so much more is available to
you but still at the end of whatever the
process you finish with there there's a
number that'll be conserved and that is
the What's called the Barrion number so
it's the total number of protons plus
the total number of neutrons you can
transmute protons into neutrons or vice
versa in in nuclear processes which is
partti of the reason there're so much
more uh use much more better energy than
things that just affect the chemistry
but it's still uh most of the energy is
stored in the rest Mass of the protons
and the neutrons and you want to get
that and nuclear processes conserve that
um beta Decay will maybe turn a proton
into a neutron or vice versa but the
total number of protons plus neutrons is
not changing and so therefore 99.9% of
the energy is inaccessible to you so
what you need to do to get that energy
and try and get most of the MC squ out
of the matter that you have what you
need to do is is use a process that eats
Baron number that can in which you can
start off with a proton or a neutron and
end up with no Proton or Neutron and
instead all of that energy Unleashed in
high radiation that you can use for
purposes
so electromagnetic interactions won't do
that strong interactions also won't do
that weak interactions won't do that the
only force of nature that will do that
um with a small caveat the only force of
nature that that we know that will do
that is the gravitational interaction
and so you it is a property of black
holes that you can stand outside the
black hole and throw protons and
neutrons into the black holes and then
it'll process it uh and then spit out
photons at the end in Hawking radiation
and and and gravitons which is going to
be slightly annoying to have to uh
capture and and neutros but like they're
there in principle uh and in principle
you could capture them so one thing that
black holes might be technologically
useful for in the future is you start
off with a much smaller black hole than
uh than what I've just than uh the size
of the sun be very careful about making
sure it doesn't grow and yeah you going
to be super duper careful um and throw
in protons and neutrons uh and then get
out photons and in
principle if you could capture the
everything that's emitted from the black
hole including the gravitons and the in
the neutrinos uh that gets rid of the
Barrion number conservation problem and
allows you to build power plants that
approach 100% efficiency and by 100% I
mean uh not the way we measure gas
turbine efficiency where we talk about
the total available chemical energy in
the gas I mean 100% of the MC squared of
the entire gas you're you're putting in
yeah although if you consider
our Cosmic endowment we're not exactly
lacking for Mass we have a lot of mass
um on the other hand uh you know we also
have plans uh for our future that
involve exponential growth and
eventually we will uh run low on that
mass and you know not that many
doublings before we're using up the
whole galaxy so you want to use it
carefully okay let's actually talk about
black holes um yeah maybe just ask like
how much information you can a black
hole store ah okay well as much
information that's a great question that
has been a very productive line of
thought and uh the answer to that
question goes back
to uh Hawking and and Penrose um so you
could even ask another question which is
how much information can anything store
so actually can we back up why do we
like it is actually notable that this is
a question which ask of black holes in
particular like do how often do we ask
like how much information in the sun
store uh uh like why why in particular
are we interested in how much
information in Black HW in store well
that that turn it turns out that that's
been an incredibly productive line of
thought A and
B it also turns out that that is the
the main fact that we're most confident
about about quantum gravity so the two
great theories of 20th century physics
gravity Einstein's theory of the
curvature of space time and gravity and
all the rest of it the very tends to
make itself felt at the very large scale
and on the other hand quantum mechanics
the theory of the very small to do with
Heisenberg's uncertainty principles and
atom and atomic Spectra uh tends to make
itself seen at the very small scale
these are the two
beautiful theories of 20th century
physics the two things that we should be
most proud about that we discovered in
the early 20th century and it was
noticed pretty early on that these two
theories seem to be inconsistent with
each other that the the most obvious
ways to try and reconcile quantum
mechanics and gravity break uh they
don't you can't really shove them
together and uh this is a problem if you
think that the world should be
comprehensible that there should be some
theory that in fact is consistent that
describes the world so has been a big
project in theoretical physics over the
last uh few decades is trying to
understand how we can take Einstein's
general relativity and quantum mechanics
and make them meld together in a
mathematically and physically consistent
manner the It's tricky in part because
there's very little experimental
guidance because generativity tends to
make itself felt at large scales quantum
mechanics at small scales and so trying
to find a place where they meet in the
middle it must be that they do meet but
that trying to drag that out with
experiment is very tricky but this has
been a big project is trying to figure
out how to do this Einstein spent some
years unsuccessfully doing this in the
later less productive part of his career
and uh this project of trying to unite
these is something that a lot of people
have thought a lot about the String
Theory comes out of this uh this project
a number of other lines of thought
there is however one fact about that
merger that we are most confident about
about anything about the merger and that
exactly returns to this question of how
much information can you store in a
given region of SpaceTime um and in fact
how much region and the answer to that
involves black holes so uh the answer uh
is how much if you have a region of of a
certain area uh maybe a sphere of a
certain area and you said how much
information can you store in that region
the amount of information you can store
measured in bits the entropy of that
region is given by the area uh of that
region divided by uh G Newton's constant
and H bar Plank's constant so that's how
you know that this is something to do
with quantum gravity because it involves
both G uh and H bar is is that the only
situation in physics where we both of
those end up be both of those constants
end up being in the same place that is
not the only situation no anytime you
have quantum gravity they'll tend to be
in the same place and sometimes even
when you don't have quantum gravity but
you have the interplay of gravitational
forces and Quantum degeneracy pressures
uh those will also that'll end up in
those but it's in some sense the
simplest uh situation in which it occurs
which is why so much time has been
thinking spent thinking about thought
experiments to do with black holes so
the there was a physicist called
beckenstein who figured out that that
that should be the answer at the area
divided by GH bar and then Hawking's
great contribution to physics was
figuring out that it was the area defied
by GH bar but he also got the preactor
and the preactor was a quarter so this
is this is you know aing figured out
that it's a quarter it's the area
divided by four GH bar um and this is a
super interesting answer um how much
information can you store in a given
region is given by the area and in fact
black holes
maximize that black hole store that
amount of information in a given area
but but and specifically area meaning
surface area meaning surface area
exactly so the reason that that's such a
wild answer and an answer that's led to
all sorts of thought experiments to do
with with uh quantum gravity ever since
then is that you might naively think
that the amount of information you can
store in a region is given not by its
surface area but by its volume so if I
have a hard drive and I take another
hard drive and another hard drive and
another hard drive and I keep piling
them up the amount of information I can
store on those hard drives scales like
the number of those hard drives and that
means it scales like the volume of the
region in which I'm storing the hard
drives that everything we know about
classical you know classic
thermodynamics tells us that that the
amount of information should scale like
the volume everything we know about
non-gravitational physics tends to tell
us to point in the direction of the
amount of information you can store
goes like the volume and yet this is
like the most surprising fact that that
is incredibly generative is that in once
you combine once you add gravity to the
picture once you combine quantum
mechanics and gravity the amount of
information you can store in a given
region a given sphere because like the
surface area of that region not like the
volume of that region and and you might
think that that's
um you might think that that possibly be
right um and and you might give the
following argument okay so there some uh
the some region and I'm just going to
keep adding more and more hard drives to
that region and as I make uh that region
bigger and bigger and bigger uh the
amount of information on those hard
drives sces like the number of those
hard drives which goes like the radius
of that region cubed and the thing about
the radius of the region cubed is it
grows faster at large radius than the
radius of that region squared so I just
told you that the amount of information
you can store in a region is given by
the the surface area and yet I also gave
you a way to make it scale like the
volume So eventually if I make the
region big enough the amount of
information in that uh in that volume
will break will be bigger than the bound
that I just said therefore I've ruled
out Hawkings and penr and beckon steen's
bound uh what goes wrong with that
thought
experiment uh is that eventually if I
make a big enough pile of hard drives
the whole pile of hard drives will
undergo gravitational collapse and form
a black hole actually um but then there
has to be sort of an experiment not
experimental but a sort of
um do you have to C the numbers then
to determine that just before the pile
of hard drives would collapse into a
black hole the amount of information
stored in that cubic pile of hard drives
is less than the um amount of
information that then gets turned into
the the surface area of the black hole
because I theoretically it's POS if I
don't know if I'm like getting my math
intuitions right right it's like
theoretically possible that like even
though the black hole is smaller because
it's only the surface area the cubic
ends up being bigger yeah you can you
have to run that calculation um but if
you do run the calculation it turns out
that it's nowhere near when it it wasn't
close the the uh this not one of those
things where they just balance each
other they don't just balance each other
out if I take a you know an online
shopping website and I buy a bunch of w
and Digital hard drives and I calculate
the inflammation storage capacity of
those and compare it to uh the the area
of a black hole you you know I figure
out when the pressure in the hard drive
will be enough to stop it for collapsing
to form a black hole uh it is nowhere
close it will make a black hole way way
way before it comes close to violating
beckenstein oring pound got it okay
sorry didn't and then you um oh yeah so
that's the information storage in black
holes the reason you know that that's
also the information storage Bound for
Anything not just black holes is that if
you had something that wasn't a black
hole that had more information than that
in a given region and you just add
matter eventually that that thing itself
would collapse to form a black hole and
so it couldn't it couldn't be the case
just logically that that had more
information than the black hole it'll
it'll tend to you just hinted at the
idea that um somehow this is like the
most productive line of thought that
physics has come up with in the last few
decades um why is that why why is the
fact that the area is proportional to
the information of a black hole tell us
so much about the universe it's been
extremely important for our
understanding of quantum gravity it's
perhaps the central fact that we know
about quantum gravity is that the
information scales with the area and
that is a hint you know that fact that
was known since the 70s was a big hint
that
became uh very influential later on um
at the as understood by Beck and c and
Hawking it's just a weird fact about
black holes perhaps but we Now
understand it as uh a strong indication
of what we call called the holographic
principle the holographic principle um
has been a sort of powerful idea uh in
quantum gravity and and it's the
following so if you took a
non-gravitational
system you know like in which you
ignored gravity like the pile of hard
drives the information storage would
scale like the the volume as we
discussed whereas in fact it scales like
the area so or another way to say that
is if you take a three-dimensional
3+1 dimensional uh theory in which you
have both quantum mechanics and
gravity that uh the information scor
scales like R squ rather than R cubed
I.E it scales as though you had a
non-gravitational system in one fewer
Dimension so if you had a
two-dimensional theory in which there
was no gravity the information stored in
a given region would also scale like r s
because the information will be just the
two dimensional volume as in as in the
area so in other words it's at least as
far as information density the
information capacity is concerned a
gravitational theory in three dimensions
is like a non-gravitational theory in
two Dimensions or more generally a
gravitational theory in N Dimensions is
like a non-gravitational theory in two
minus one in N minus one Dimensions so
that that is a big hint that forms the
basis of the holographic principle it's
like gravity eats information like
there's less information than you
thought there was you naively thought
there was if you didn't include
information and so the holographic
principle says that maybe that's not
just
a a neat observation maybe it in fact is
the case that a for every or for for
some Quantum gravitational theories
there is another theory that is exactly
equivalent to it in one fewer Dimension
and so this led to mala's ads CFT
correspondence gate gravity Duality
which was the most cited paper in hii
theoretical physics uh ever I think
maybe at this stage uh and in the late
90s he wrote down he didn't he took that
as a hint and it wrote down an exact We
Believe an exact Duality between a
particular theory of quantum gravity
some particular flavor of string theory
and a non-gravitational theory that
lives on lives on the boundary of that
space um and what problem does it solve
if you can model
the world in a fewer Dimension that
doesn't involve gravity well it's so
this was a very infal paper as I said um
and really becomes a tremendous
theoretical laboratory for trying to
understand the connection between
gravity and quantum mechanics um one
problem it solves is gravity is
mysterious particularly once we improve
quantum mechanics in various ways uh
that that we could go into um you know
this is why it's hard to quantize
gravity but if you can say that this the
the of of that involves both quantum
mechanics and gravity is exactly jewel
is is in some sense the same Theory as
just an alternative description of a
theory in one fewer Dimensions that
doesn't involve gravity well that's
great because we have much better grasp
on how to understand theories that don't
have gravity than we do on theories that
do have gravity so it puts everything on
a much clearer
footing uh to to have this
non-gravitational description because
then you can just use the standard tools
of non-gravitational quantum field
theory in order to Define it and
understand it
so at one level I understand that if the
information on in a area is limited by
the information that would be on the
surface of a black hole in that region
um then yeah there the you can model the
surface area as a two two-dimensional
object um on the other hand if I just
think about like real world just like
you're over there and I'm over here and
if I like do something here it's not
interacting with you and in order to
model that fact I need to model the
dimension at in which the third
dimension in which we're separated um
which I guess if I'm like actually
looking at you through a window pane I
maybe wouldn't have access to so and I I
so how in two Dimensions how do you
model how like that there's a reason we
have the third dimension right and how
how is that how how is that modeled if
you reduce that Dimension yeah so I
maybe I should just lead with some
disappointing news which is that ads c f
was in tremendous conceptual
breakthrough in our understanding of
quantum gravity and and embodied the
holographic principle yeah but at the
same time it doesn't describe our
universe in particular in ads CFT there
is a negative cosmological constant in
in the gravitational Theory and our
universe as we discussed before has a
positive cosmal constant so it's great
because it provides an existence proof
of a a well- defined theory of quantum
gravity not alas in the universe in
which we live in okay but having said
that yeah it's extremely confusing and
was uh a very impressive result
precisely because you might think how
could it possibly be the case that two
different theories in two different
dimensions uh could turn out to be
equivalent and the answer to your
question is if you have two people who
are living in this this negatively
curved space in and talking to each
other what does that look like in this
other Theory I say that there's some you
know there's this process going on in
the gravitational Theory that's Jewel
which is exactly isomorphic to some
process going on in the
non-gravitational theory in one fewer
Dimensions but what what maybe looks
very simple in one Theory like you and I
chatting back and forth to each other
would look like some complicated plasma
physics in in the uh lower dimensional
boundary Theory and so that the sort of
complexity of how it looks like which is
a better description does not need to be
conserved across the isomorphism so in
fact that's often what we use it for we
use it to do Arbitrage between things
that look simple in one Theory and
things that look simple in the
alternative description and we use we
use the fact that things look simple in
one to understand the sort of
complicated version in the other in fact
that it flows in both directions you
might naively expect that because
gravity is so complicated we would
always be using the non-gravitational
theory to understand the gravitational
Theory that's not always true there are
these plasma physics is itself extremely
complicated and there are these big uh
collisions that we do at at Rick in in
Brook Haven where we smash two gold
atoms together and make big Fireballs of
quar Glon plasma and it's extremely
challenging to calculate what would
happen there and yet people use this
this duality in the opposite direction
to say even though it looks super
complicated with uh this weird plasma
physics in the non-gravitational theory
it's actually uh can simply be
understood as some simple black hole
property in the gravitational Theory um
would any maybe not ads CFT itself but
would some Theory which relies on the
holographic principle ever be able to
account for a world like ours where
unlike the surface of a black hole there
isn't a boundary because of the posit
positive cosmological constant and it's
constantly expanding is there some hope
that there in fact is a way to have some
sort of dual Theory to this that somehow
describes a boundary or yeah I people
are working on that that is an open area
of research ever since the original CF
was written down people have been trying
to formulate versions of it in which
have a positive cos maral constant um
it's difficult and part of the
difficulty
is goes all the way back to Archimedes
you know you you need a it is easiest to
formulate a theory if you have a fixed
point on which to stand and observe
things from a distance in in a universe
with a pos positive cosmal constant that
you don't have that you don't have that
you're necessarily mixed up with the
system because you live in a universe
that has only a finite amount of entropy
finite amount of free energy uh there is
an inherent limitation to the Precision
of the experiments you can do that just
makes things way trickier so for that
and related reasons it's a much harder
project but for sure people are working
on that what is the correct conceptual
way to think about this cuz one version
is the boundary uh is um one way to
simplify the processes that are actually
four-dimensional um another is I don't
know how we think about this in the
context of black holes but maybe in the
Contex of black hes no the information
actually is on the horizon the analogous
thing here would be like no somehow we
are on the boundary of the universe
somehow um is there a sense in which one
of these interpretations is correct ah
yeah okay that's a good question so
um this Duality idea where you have two
different descriptions of the same thing
is not the ads CFT was not not the first
such example in physics that it's it's a
common Trope in physics that you can
have two different descriptions of the
same thing some of which are more useful
in one scenario some of which are more
useful in the other scenario but but
which are both exactly correct and there
are non-gravitational examples in
physics that go back a long way you may
then ask you know which one is right and
which one is not right uh is is it
actually a CFT that's pretending to be
you know that has this weird alternative
description of as as a gravitational
Theory or is the gravitational Theory
correct and the other one's not correct
I think this is more of a philosophical
question my answer would be is if the if
the isomorphism was just an
approximation like it was really one
thing and you were just pretending it
was the other thing and that
approximation worked in some region of
validity and not others then I would say
that the the one was right and the other
one was just a alternative fanciful
description that is not our
understanding of ads CFT as we
understand it today our understanding is
that this is a precise isomorphism it's
not a
analogy it's not a metaphor it is not a
approximation that is valid in some
domain and not another it really is the
case that these two theories are exactly
equivalent to each other and if that's
correct then as a matter of philosophy I
would say those are both equally real
those so there it's not the case that
one is more real than the other they're
perfect simulations of each other um
yeah are you an ads dreaming you're a
CFT or a CFT dreaming you're an ads I
think I think these I think these are
just two completely different in
equivalent descriptions of the same
identical physics tell me if this is
just like a question that just doesn't
make sense because look I uh when I was
like uh when I if you try to ask
somebody about like uh the quantum many
worlds um uh where are the other worlds
right and they oh it's just like they're
in Hilbert's space like where is
Hilbert's space they just like no dude
it's just like a conceptual like you
don't you know just like stop asking
questions um intuitively it feels like
there should be a sense in which like
there's physical existence and either
that existence is in this
four-dimensional space or it's in some
space that exists on the boundary um is
this just again just going to lead us
into philosophical Loops or is there
something that can be said more about it
and also in a DEC in a world world like
ours um what exactly would the boundary
mean yeah so there are two components to
that
question you have an intuition
that if something is real it needs to be
spatially localized and things that
areed in space somehow can't be real I
would say that that's not my intuition
my intuition is that there can be two
completely different descriptions of the
same physics and if it's precise neither
of those is any more real than the
other things do not need to be spatially
localized
um you separately asked what would it
look like what would a version of uh
where is the boundary theory in c space
since there's no boundary that is a
great question that people who are
trying to generalize ads CFT to to a
universe like ours that has a positive
SC modal constant that they wrestle with
and there's more than one proposal some
of which is that the place one example
of a proposal is that the jewel Theory
should live on the cosmic Horizon so
there's a you if you go five billion
light years you can send information to
that that point and have it return to
you
but on the other hand there are things
that are 100 billion light years away
that we will never be able to
communicate with and there's a boundary
between those two between some things
that we could in principle communicate
with and things that we couldn't in
principle communicate with that is the
cosmological Horizon and some people who
are trying to do a version of holography
that works in universes with the cosmal
Positive cosmal constant like to put the
the second theory there other people
like to put it in the distant future in
the sort of infinitely distant future
and and that's part of the problem is
where do we even put that theory it's
not like in these it's not like in our
universe where you can just put it
spatially infinitely far away and and be
done with it if it's spatially finite
then we are currently at the boundary of
infinite many other universes that
are located uh or whose Center is
located elsewhere absolutely so a
cosmological horizon is very different
from a black hole Horizon in this regard
a black hole Horizon there is a point of
no return and if you get get closer than
that you fall into the black hole and
getting out again uh and it's everybody
can agree where that is um for cosmology
the there is a point of no return but
there's no but the point of no return is
return to a given person and so for each
person there is a different point of no
return and as you say we live on the
boundary just as much as we live on the
boundary of those people live on our
cosmological Horizon we may live on on
theirs okay another uh philosophical
question there's seems to be many
theories which imply
that um there's some sort of infinity or
approximate Infinity that exists um
where uh in Quantum minu worlds you know
there there's like constantly these um
these uh different branches of the wave
function spawning off where things are
slightly different and so everything
that can possibly happen has happened um
uh including basically the same exact
thing I guess if this bubble Universe
stuff is correct it implies a similar
picture
uh philosophically should it have some
implication on our worldview uh it would
be surprising that we would learn this
much about the universe then it has like
no implications whatsoever right good
question I think I'm going to say yes
and no I mean it's so clearly I mean if
correct let's just take the quantum case
which is perhaps even more secure than
the cosmological Multiverse case in the
quantum case it really does look like
the default expectation given everything
we understand about quantum mechanics
should be the many worlds interpret in
which the universe keeps branching off
and there be more and more branches and
every time or almost every time you come
to a a point of
quantum a measurement we might cloy say
is made that the Universe branches and
then there's every possibility is
represented still in the in the in the
grander way function that's a pretty
profound thing to learn about the
ontology of the world if if if correct
and it seems like it should be the
default expectation um and you might say
you know maybe I don't care about uh
existential risk uh in our universe
because you know we blow each other up
or turn into goo or whatever uh okay
that's that's sad for us maybe our our
our world has vacuum Decay but there are
some other branches of the way function
where it's not and so I'm kind of you
know some other branches will have made
different choices in the past and
they're sort of guaranteed to somewhere
in the branches of the of the wave
function to be a a flourishing world and
so I'm not so bothered um I would say
that that's
I'm not not going to tell you you know
what uh what utility function you should
place on the wave function but uh but
born is uh you know there the born rule
in quantum mechanics and that tells you
that you should you shouldn't just
say if it's there in one branch it it's
that's just as good as anything else
born's rule which is one of the
foundational rules in quantum mechanics
tells you how much to care about each
branch you don't care about them equally
and it says that
the correct way to calculate the
expectation value of anything uh is to
calculate its value in each branch and
weight those branches by the square of
the amplitude of the W function which is
some particular quantity um and then add
together all of those different answers
so that's a linear answer which is to
say that the total utility of the
universe is the sum of the utility in
each of these branches appropriately
weighted by boron's rule so if that's
true you know you should hope to make
our Branch as good possible just because
the whatever is going on in the other
Branch the total utility is just the sum
of what's going on in that branch and
what's going on our branch and so you
should try as hard as you can to make
our our branches as great as possible
nevertheless I do kind of understand
that you might have a portfolio theory
that seems to be inconsistent with
born's rule but is somehow intuitive in
which somehow it's not just a linear
function on these universes you mean
this would only be like uh if you are a
total utilitarian yeah who um uh then
there's a sort of very straightforward
way in much can dismiss this and be like
is one of these like it seems like in
physics there's always these kinds of
things where like oh we we think we
discovered something new but how would
you look at that like that this speed of
life is still conserved um and similarly
here are like oh infinite univers ah but
like would you look at that like it has
no implications on our decisions um but
most people are not totally utilitarians
and if you have some very very simple
thought experiments to illustrate a
couple um suppose that there's two
universes in sorry Two Worlds in two
different Cosmic Horizons who will never
interact with each other causally um uh
but each one has intelligent life and
civilization and beauty and everything
we might care about if one of the two
gets distinguished I'm like pretty sad
and this is suppos both of these make up
the entire universe if both of them get
extinguished I'm more than twice as sad
um there's something to that sort of
finality which makes existential risk
Salient in the first place and if you if
you agree with that intuition then I
think you should be inclined to think
that like ah there is something
significant about the fact that in some
um base reality like genuinely the story
carries forward um on the other end if
you're somebody who cares about
minimizing uh the uh downside of like
people talking about like suffering risk
or something right like the idea that if
if it's physically possible to have a
universe flow of torture it's actually
in fact happening or will happen again
is like uh you could just be like ah but
the amplitude on that is like so small
or the square of the amplitude is so
small you know like uh um in the
weighted averages ends up close to
nothing but I'm like that that really
sucks you know that's like actually
happening um yeah I think there's a
number of ways to think about this I
think in part people's intuition is may
be formed in cases like extinct
where if you have an animal that's going
extinct you know if half of the animals
get wiped out that's somehow less bad
than if both halves of the animals gets
wiped out but that's because they really
are't going to interact in the future
and there's there's you know the
possibility of the of the you know those
don't have nonoverlapping future L cones
that the two populations of some
possibly extinct animal um it's also the
case that this is a pretty like bnes
rule narrowly defined does not really
have anything to say about this how one
should calculate the total utility it's
it's just more of a sort of the natural
utility measure that would come out of
this um particularly when you get to the
cosmological Multiverse I think that
these these are very difficult questions
to answer um your intuition that two you
know may perhaps two different universes
in which like how we calculate those do
we just add together the utility in both
or is there some nonlinearity to do with
it basically for the cosmological
ultiverse
there isn't a particularly good way to
decide what the waiting Factor should be
we we don't have the same the equivalent
of born's rule in quantum mechanics and
I think it's it's at least open for
opinions like yours to be uh you know to
be in fact be there should be some
better way in which we calculate it
that's not just a linear function um of
these different kinds of Infinities is
there some sense in which some are more
fundamental than others that is uh the
maybe the um the bubbles are artifacts
of what's actually happening on the wave
function or vice Versa you're talking
about the two kinds of Multiverse the
sort of cosmological Multiverse and the
quantum mechanical Multiverse yeah they
get very bound up if you try and write
down a theory that has both of them
because whether there's a bubble there
you're trying to make bubble universes
but what gives rise to Bubble universe
is is often Quantum processes so often
you end up in superp positions over
there being a bubble universe and they
not being a bubble Universe uh there and
that means that these two kinds of
Multiverse the sort of quantum
mechanical Multiverse and the
cosmological Multiverse end up getting
totally inter meshed with each other but
it sounds like the base reality is like
still like the the way function over all
the bubbles in the entire infl time
field or whatever yeah so again we only
really properly know how to do quantum
gravity and do the counting in with when
there's a negative cosmological constant
as we discussed with adft in these
bubble universes where there's a
positive cosmal constant it's still
somewhat an open question how to do the
accounting of of what happens and and
where and how much it should count okay
which is to say we don't know the answer
to to that question and your opinion uh
is is not ruled
out um you know it's a little bit
confusing because uh in one context
we're laying out sort of very
practical I don't know if you can call
um black hole batteries practical but um
very like sort of like tangible um uh uh
limitations on the
uh what future or like very distant
future descendants could do with all the
matter in the galaxy and so forth on the
other hand we're like bubble universes
as big as our own made somewhere in
somebody's lab
maybe uh so basically
yeah how um how confident are we that
the Practical limitations we think we
know about will actually constrain in
our future descendants yeah I think
that's a a good question certainly some
of the possibilities we've discussed so
far have different epistemic statuses
about how confident we are or not
confident um and as we also discussed
it's some of these bounds are somewhat
fragile um can you communicate faster
than the speed of light for example
let's just take that as an example bound
um we think you can't according to the
laws of science as we understand
it most physicists will be pretty
surprised if it turned out that you
could what's your probability if like a
million years from now we are able to
communicate faster than light how
surprised are you that is a tricky one
that is a really tricky one we've only
thought it's only a century that we
thought you can't communicate faster
than the speed of light um a million
years is such a radical time that maybe
we've sort of dissolved the question
into some greater uh into some greater
question uh and we we understand it
doesn't even really make sense I would
be pretty surprised um if you make me
make a number
I think that there is a
uh greater than 90% chance that in 100
years we are still limited by the speed
Point there's a 98% chance if you make
me make me be precise okay so then what
are the other constraints on a future
civilization uh that
are that they might care about right so
if uh we've got the superum intelligence
is and they're colonizing the
Galaxy um what are uh what are the
things they might want to do that they
can't to do um they they probably care
about energy they care about computation
so energy limits um we've talked about
the efficiency of of batteries and
extracting energy uh you know MC squ is
the I'm highly confident that the most
energy you can extract from a given
piece of matter is MC squ at least until
you start getting cosmology involved
um uh other limits will be land hour
limits or in other words you know with a
given amount of energy how much how
useful is a given amount of energy to
you you know can if you we wouldn't care
about having as huge amounts of energy
if you could get an arbitrary amount of
value out of a fixed unit of energy we
think that that's not true we think that
the uh in particular if we're going to
do computations with it for example that
there's going to and that computation
makes errors that there is a fixed cost
to of a a bit basically a bit of free
energy uh in order to correct those
errors and we're confident that there's
no way to make computers that don't make
errors it is a very interesting question
what the fundamental limits on errors
are in a computer
um how how far down can they be pushed
um in terms of never making errors I
think that's very unlikely if for no
other reason than that there is a
minimum back around temperature caused
by the uh the expansion of our universe
by the by again it all coming back to
the cosmical constant uh that gives a
very small but non-zero temperature to
our universe that I think will
inevitably mean that we make errors you
might imagine we could just set up some
kind of perpetual motion machine that's
just like thinking happy thoughts over
and over again in a quantum computer
that never that never ties and never
stops uh I think that inevitably there
would be the un would leak in and there
would be errors uh yeah but but what
what the minimum error rate is is not I
think a clear I don't have a clear
answer to that question physics doesn't
have a clear answer to that question so
one question you might have is how like
what will be the nature
of
uh not only the things that are
descendants might care about but like
um what will they be able to produce
quote unquote domestically what will
they want to trade for and if something
like Alchemy is just like super you know
it's like equals MC scared is all you
care about then it just like look your
star system your Galaxy has a certain
amount of mass and you can convert that
to energy and there's fundamentally no
reason to trade if there's like not that
high transaction cost to um uh make it
into whatever you want on the other hand
if there are some limits like in fact
you had to make like Galaxy wide
factories or um you had to do these NP
hard calculations that you can even with
a Galaxy you're going only Trace down
certain segments of um uh the search
space or something there might be
reasons to trade um extremely sort of
like uh uh Pine this question but how
much can we into it
about these kinds of constraints I mean
so in economics the theory of
comparative advantage only applies
if not all resources are can be
transported like if you can just go in
and just disassemble whoever you're
doing the comparative advantage with you
might as well just turn them into apply
it all to the ab the party with the
absolute Advantage um so maybe the same
thing would be true in the in the
universe um I think there are a number
of questions in there for ex for
starters um not all energy is equally
useful in different places in the
universe if there's a Galaxy over there
and a Galaxy here on this side of the
universe because of the expansion of the
universe if if I beamed the energy if I
disassembled that Galaxy and tried to
send it back here either by you know
literally sending it on Starships or
converting it
to light and beaming the light back in a
laser and then having a big you know
photo photos here uh PV here so
collected or for whatever mechanism by
the time it reached me there would be a
massive red shift and so keeping it in
place is maybe better than just
disassembling it and all and bringing it
back back home but there's another
question which is you know what is the
is the plan to these are all unknowns to
do with both physics and the nature of
technology is the most important thing
that all of the value will be created
here on Earth and we just need to get as
many resources back here on Earth and
it's you know the the there are super
linear returns to scale of having
accumulated resources in one place so we
just want to make earth an absolute
Paradise or do we want to spread is in
fact sublinear and we want to spread
civilization or all the way throughout
all of these galaxies um I think
questions like that are going to be
important in addressing your question of
what the returns to scale are and
returns to trade as well uh if like the
Galaxy in uh a billionaires from now has
a certain GDP what percentage of that
GDP do you think is just like uh the end
result of
computations or confirmation of that a
computation has been made maybe it's
like simulating honi that the other
exided Galaxy cares about or something
just because it may prove to be some
much more efficient to do things in
simulation than to do them in the real
world my guess would be a high
percentage of that but
I maybe that's wrong yeah if computer is
the main thing you carear about what is
going to be the uh physically how will
the uh the flops in a galaxy be
organized will it be as like a planet
white computers as like entire like a
huge blob the size of a star system what
do we have some sense of
yeah I think this is a super interesting
question so it returns to the question
we were asking
before with quantum computers we know
for example that
the amount of quantum computation you
can do in terms of the the equivalent
amount of classical computation and
trying to do some facturing algorithm or
something grows super linearly with the
number of cubits in fact it grows almost
exponentially with a number of cubits so
a 200 Cubit quantum
computer uh is much more than twice as
good as a 100 Cubit quantum
computer um for certain tasks but you
know for the tasks that we try and use
quantum computers for that's true so
that line of reasoning might lead you to
believe that in the distant future we
will just try
and you know even paying the cost of the
red shift and all these other questions
we'll feed all of the energy and free
energy back into one Central quantum
computer and it'll all be about making
that Central quantum computer as big as
we possibly can uh even at the cost of
inefficiency on the other hand there are
other kinds
of tasks for which actually having a
twice as big computer is not that much
better or certainly not more than twice
as better as having two smaller
computers in in that scenario uh it'll
be it'll be a more distributed setup I
guess in this quantum computer system
you you would need to have coherence
across this like huge which might not be
a practical engineering difficulty for
future civilizations but does seem like
yeah either it would need to be
collocated or you need to send the
quantum
coherence uh out that's actually not
that hard to do it's it's a property of
photons that they do tend to maintain
when they're propagating in the vacuum
they basically maintain their coherence
for a very long way in fiber optic
cables uh you reach trouble because they
start getting absorbed by the fiber
optics after tens of miles but in the
vacuum you could in principle share
quantum entanglement across the the
universe if you if you did it right H
then wouldn't you wouldn't you expect um
when you say like a central computer
physically wouldn't just be like a huge
like contiguous uh well it might be
because you know the sort of analog of
the classical fact that flops are not
the only thing you care about you also
care about bandwidth and interconnects
and things like that so perhaps the same
would be true I mean here we're getting
a pretty speculative uh eror area but
you could imagine either configuration
either in which you have a huge number
of different quantum computers that are
talking to each other via uh
entanglement networks or in which you
just have one big Central Computer yeah
um final question uh timeline to when
you are automated as a physicist oh good
question
um many of the tasks that I might have
performed in the past I think are
already automated at some level until I
am totally out of the picture and no
longer
necessary
um that's probably pretty close to uh
ASI complete so whatever your timeline
for Asi is well I guess the question is
what
Zs
um yeah I'm I'm squirming somewhat
uncomfortably in answer to that question
because uh I'm not totally sure I could
certainly imagine a scenario in which
it's five years all right I think that's
a great place to close I don't think so
much thank you great to be here